BOOK Adam Sharr Modern Architecture.pdf
Modern Architecture: A Very Short Introduction

Chapter 1

Introduction

Somewhere between 1910 and 1970, architecture changed. Now that
modern architecture is familiar—and we’ve seen how it became both
celebrated and vilified—it’s hard to imagine how novel it once seemed.
Expensive Western buildings became transformed from ornamented fancies,
which referred to the classical and medieval pasts, into strikingly plain
reflections of novel materials, technologies, and ideas. It’s equally hard to
remember how modem architecture promised transformation, seemingly
poised to turn dirty, overcrowded cities—characterized by packed slums
and Satanic mills—into spacious realms of generous housing and clean
mechanized production, set in parkland. At certain times and in certain
cultures, modern architecture stood for the liberation of the future from the
past.

The phrase ‘modern architecture’ describes a spectrum of buildings and
ideas. From Shakespeare’s times until the 19th century, ‘modern’ in English
meant ‘up to date’. The idea of progress became important in the 19th
century and that made the modern ‘progressive’: part of an apparently
predestined course from an impoverished past, to a still inadequate present,
towards an idealized future. More recently however, the term modern
largely came to describe a specific time in the 20th century when many
people, especially in the West, seemed persuaded that a better future was on
its way.

For some historians, modern architecture refers primarily to stark white
buildings from the 1920s and 1930s: crisp, hovering edifices which, so the
story goes, reflected honestly their internal functions on the outside,
illustrating how they were put together, highlighting the ‘shock of the new’.
For others, the idea of a modern architectural future had a longer history. It
dated back to the Paris World’s Fair of 1889, or John Ruskin’s 1849
exhortations about how medieval Gothic cathedrals expressed structure
honestly in stone.

Just as it’s possible to argue about the beginnings of modern architecture, its
demise has been much debated. For various commentators, modern
architecture is over. It was supplanted by ‘postmodernism’ in the 1980s and
1990s, when architects became less interested in the expression of function,
and returned to historical motifs (like the 1991 extension to London’s
National Gallery, designed by Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates), or
striking shape-making of various kinds (like the sinuous Guggenheim
Museum, Bilbao, 1997, designed by Frank O. Gehry’s studio). For others,
modern architecture—as the expression of contemporary building
technologies, as the idea of making construction legible and transparent—
remains current, no matter that other disciplines insist on the demise of
modernity in their fields.

I’ll take a long and broad view of modern architecture here, examining what
Harold Rosenberg called ‘the tradition of the new’, arguing that it didn’t
just emerge fully formed in the 1910s and 1920s, or as the consequence of
19th-century pioneers, but was instead the product of two centuries of
industrialization, and the global spread of industrial culture. I set out neither
to promote nor condemn modern architecture. Rather, my aim is to illustrate
how it was produced out of—and reflected—the cultures that constructed it.
I explore it in all its strangeness and thoughtfulness, as designed by some
curious, obsessive characters.

The organization of this book

Certain famous modern architects were skilled self-publicists. Memorable
aphorisms, like Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s ‘less is more’, and Le

Corbusier’s ‘the house is a machine for living’, entered the lexicons of
popular quotation. Less widely known, but chortled-at by generations of
architecture students, is Louis Kahn’s 1971 conversation with a brick:

If you think of Brick, you say to Brick, ‘What do you want, Brick?’ And Brick says to you ‘I
like an Arch’. And if you say to Brick ‘Look, arches are expensive and I can use a concrete
lintel over you. What do you think of that Brick?’ Brick says ‘I like an Arch’.

This image of architect in communion with brick illustrates a point which
preoccupied modern architects: that different building materials imply their
own inherent logics. How particular materials go together, Kahn suggested,
make certain combinations of structure, wall, and building assembly seem
inevitable: brick wants to make arches; timber wants to make lattices of
beams and posts; steel wants to make frames; reinforced concrete wants to
make frames too, and also thin planes and big spans. You can persuade
those materials to behave otherwise, but why—Kahn implied—as a
thoughtful modern architect, would you do that? This was not new. In 1863,
Parisian architect Eugéne-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc wrote that any ‘change
of material must bring about a change of forms’. The contemporaneous
German writer Gottfried Semper argued that brick, wood, and iron should
be treated according to their ‘statical laws’. Both responded to Ruskin’s
ideas about honesty to materials and the honest visual expression of the
uses of a building. Their earnest morality persisted into modern
architecture. And the idea that materials have their own inherent logics
explains how I’ve organized this book.

Historians often gave architects more credit than they deserved for shaping
modern architecture. Moder architects’ imaginations were hugely
extended by material innovations. Developments in steel and reinforced
concrete radically altered possibilities for shaping buildings, as did new
systems for electric lighting and handling air. These technical innovations,
in turn, emerged from new cultures of industrial production. Thus, my story
is organized around the technical innovations that opened up the cultural
and intellectual opportunities for modern architecture to happen.

This isn’t to say that architects were involved in the invention of new
technologies—most weren’t, and many disapproved at first—but, as Adrian

Forty has argued, architects’ special ability was to conjure up images for
new technologies that made them seem striking and appealing. Architects
didn’t create steel and reinforced concrete, or fluorescent tubes and air
conditioning, but they appreciated how those technologies could make the
world look and feel different. And they designed knowingly in relation to
imagery from other spheres, like modern art and industrial design. The
British modern architect Wells Coates wrote in 1931 that there was a choice
between ‘the use of the new ... materials as prisoners—the slaves—of old
habits, old social prejudices, old visual prejudices; or as the means to new
forms, new habits of life, a new vision’.

My story thus explores the architectural consequences of iron and steel,
reinforced concrete, brick, air conditioning, and electric light to illustrate
how modern architecture produced powerful cultural images expressing the
potential of the future. These new technologies were not adopted by
architects in a linear sequence but, to some extent, in parallel. So, each
chapter here—while organized broadly in chronological order—shifts back
in time to begin before the previous one ends.

Some definitions

I define modernity here as the condition of living in an industrialized
society. Industrialized societies are those shaped by modern science and
consumer technologies: by mass production, mass markets, mass
consumption, mass education, and mass media; by novelty and fashion; and
by accelerating globalization fuelled by the power of global finance.
Underpinning industrialized societies was an idea that perpetual scientific
progress operated hand in hand with economic growth, and also—
sometimes—amulti-party democracy. Alongside industry, work, and
changing patterns of domestic life, the category of modernity encompassed
ideas from art, literature, film, theatre, media, music, philosophy, and
architecture: cultural endeavours reflecting modern societies, and shaping
them through the reflections they offered. Modern technology, and the
cultures it produced, seemed poised to liberate people from rigid constraints
traditionally imposed by their gender, class, or ethnicity. But the same
progress could also seem alienating—disrupting traditional communities
and ways of life. Modernity thus mixed optimism about the social

opportunities of technology with deep unease about its consequences. The
peak of modernity occurred between the late 19th and mid-20th centuries in
the West. Indeed, modernity extended beyond the West in different places at
different times, sometimes associated with colonization in the 19th and 20th
centuries, and sometimes with postcolonial societies.

More recently, faith in perpetual progress was shaken. Science and
technology appeared fallible. Power structures linking the funding of
science and political parties with industry, finance, and military endeavours
became more apparent. The operation of these power structures in service
of people of a particular class, ethnicity, and gender, from particular comers
of the globe, was highlighted. And the vast consumption of energy and
disposable goods was questioned in terms of sustainability. For these
reasons, it’s widely assumed that modernity—as an idea about progress—
ended during the latter part of the 20th century, or at least became much
more complicated. The term ‘postmodern’ was coined to describe what
followed.

I define modern architecture here as architecture produced out of the
condition of modernity. In particular, it’s architecture that contributed to
modernity, because the images of its buildings seemed to express what
modernity stood for.

Modern architecture’s champions referred to ‘the modern movement’,
associating it with radical movements in art. The term also implied
connections with radical political movements that its characters
occasionally hooked up with, in Russia and Italy in the 1910s, and Germany
and France in the 1920s. Only when tidied up by sympathetic historians in
retrospect, however, did it look like a coherent movement. There were
always multiple modern architectures and the term meant different things to
different people at different times. In his 1896 book Modern Architecture,
architect Otto Wagner associated the idea with the rational and honest
expression of materials, structure, and function, and with the purging of
unnecessary decoration—themes familiar as late as the 1970s. In the 1910s,
however, quite different architectures of ‘Art Nouveau’, characterized by
swirling floral motifs, would also have been called modern, alongside the

‘expressionist’ crystalline shapes of Bruno Taut’s ‘Crystal Chain’ group. By
the late 1930s, however, these counted as modern less frequently. At that
time, modern architecture became more tightly defined around buildings
evoking glamorous technologies of the age: cars, ocean liners, and
aeroplanes. This was the so-called International Style, matching white
planes with flat roofs, open plans, extensive glazing, horizontal windows,
and blocks you could see below or through. By the late 1950s, multiple
modern architectures proliferated again, reconsidering what then became
seen as the ‘early modern’ architecture of the 1930s. Certain architects at
that time hoped to make modern architecture more humane, dramatic,
monumental, or systematically scientific. Despite these differences, the idea
of a single modern movement persisted. It sounded glamorous and sold
textbooks.

Modern architecture was also defined by how architects designed it. There
are three primary kinds of scaled architectural drawing: the elevation,
depicting a facade; the section, a vertical cut from roof to foundations
showing floors stacked up; and the plan, a horizontal cut showing the layout
of rooms on a floor. Where architects previously agonized over elevations,
often adapting plans and sections around decisions made about the facades,
modern architects prioritized the plan. They claimed that the layout of
rooms—the best functional arrangement for a house, library, or office—
should come first, and that elevations should be secondary. The most
famous modern architect, Le Corbusier, wrote that ‘the plan is the
generator’. Louis Sullivan’s catchy aphorism ‘form ever follows function’
was a slogan for this way of working. In the writings of Adolf Loos, it
became elevated to a moral imperative. By the 1930s, most modern
architects believed there was something truthful about designs prioritizing
function, and something dishonest about designs emphasizing a building’s
artistic decoration. Despite the rhetoric, however, modem architects
remained deeply concerned with the imagery of their buildings. Indeed,
numerous modern buildings can be understood as architectural images
dedicated to undermining the idea of architectural imagery.

From the 1930s, modern architecture increasingly became called
‘Modernism’, making it sound like a cause. The term allowed historians to
characterize modern architecture as a style like other architectural styles

(Neo-Classicism or Gothic Revivalism, for example). It also helped them
link it to other modernisms in art and literature that similarly responded to
technological cultures, industrialization, and globalization. This appealed to
critics who made reputations out of classifying trends. But many modern
architects thought they were isolating honest, timeless ways to design—not
indulging in something as fleeting as a style—and vigorously rejected the
idea.

Modernism appears with and without a capital ‘m’. Some advocates of
modern architecture used the capital letter to sort out buildings they felt
were special symbols of the movement from buildings that were merely
new. Others used it to elevate Modernism to the status of other nouns
capitalized in English, like Church or God. You won’t see Modern or
Modernism written with a capital ‘m’ again here. And I'll use modernism
sparingly. I don’t want to make modern architecture seem more important
than other architectures. Nor do I find obsessing about which famous
buildings fit into which stylistic categories particularly fruitful. When
studying architecture, it seems more interesting to think instead about
buildings themselves: how they work, what they do, and what they say.

Having reflected on the ‘modern’ in ‘modern architecture’, it’s worth
pausing on ‘architecture’. Nikolaus Pevsner, the prominent modern
historian, famously made a distinction between architecture and building:
‘A bicycle shed is a building’, he wrote, ‘whereas Lincoln Cathedral is a
work of architecture’. Distinctions like this are widespread but obstructive.
All buildings—bicycle shed or cathedral, banal office building or
obsessively detailed museum—offer insights into the values of the people
and cultures which produced them, illustrating the ideas informing their
design, construction, and use. All are valid objects of scholarly attention.
I’ve included (big) sheds and bridges in this book, alongside churches and
high-rise towers, because they all yielded important architectural images of
modernity. If anything distinguishes the buildings I’ve included here from
others, it’s that they became famous because they proved inspiring or
troubling enough for people to have projected ideas about modernity onto
them.

Most histories of modern architecture bring the story up to date. But,
because I contend that modernity transformed into something else, my story
closes in the 1970s, accepting that architecture transformed with it. This end
point coincides with a time when building regulations introduced in the
West made the idea of truth to materials harder to achieve at the level of
architectural detail. While ideas from modern architecture remain doggedly
persistent, and numerous architects still practice as paid-up modernists, ours
is now the architecture of another time which will attract its own histories in
due course.

Histories of the future

Modern architecture owed as much to its storytellers as its buildings. Le
Corbusier’s 1923 book Towards a New Architecture—which became
admired in the Anglosphere in the 1930s—tried to establish moral and
visual principles for modern architecture. Meanwhile, certain historians
rewrote architectural history to make modernism its logical consequence,
including Hitchcock and Johnson, whose 1932 term ‘International Style’
I’ve already mentioned, and Pevsner, whose Pioneers of Modern Design,
1936, sought to persuade sceptics inclined towards the past that modern
architecture actually emerged from a long history. Sigfried Giedion
illustrated in 1941 how architecture could be understood in terms of time
and space. And in the 1960s, (Peter) Reyner Banham—historian of the
immediate future’—extended the category of architecture to include all
sorts of industrial structures, technologies, and gadgets. Robert Venturi’s
Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, 1966, reminded readers that
history always infused modern architecture, and anticipated the
postmodernism that followed. It’s a curious quirk that modern architecture
—whose most extreme forms rejected the past—was so extensively
consolidated by its historians.

Architectural histories have strange conventions. Buildings are usually
designed in studios full of architects and technicians, with clients, builders,
engineers, and regulations that help to shape them. Nevertheless, historians
mostly attribute famous buildings to a single architect—usually male,
white, and Western, like most of the historians themselves—even if that
individual hardly spent any time on the project. I’ll use this pervasive

convention here, albeit guardedly, with this reminder not to forget who it
conceals. Another convention—as old as the book The Lives of the Artists
by architect Giorgio Vasari, 1550—depicts famous architects as visionary
geniuses working against the odds. This idea persists, and certain modern
architects became elevated into superheroes who could do no wrong. I'll
highlight one such anointed superhero in each chapter, recalling the
celebrity worship that still pervades architectural culture.

Few architectural history books stray from sites of financial and cultural
power. Most discuss buildings that were novel when they were constructed
becoming models for others that followed, built in places with the wealth
necessary to make them, the cultural sensibilities that prized their novelty,
and celebrated by local critics influential enough to get them widely
noticed. Architectural historians now worry about this, about repeatedly
retelling dominant but partisan stories. To compensate, they’ve worked to
make their histories more diverse and inclusive, to illustrate who has the
power to build what, when, where, how, and for whom, A very short book
like this inevitably has to omit far more than it includes, so I’ve focused
here on a small selection of buildings that also account for bigger cultural
ideas. I emphasize what modern architecture was like, why it was like that,
and how it was imagined, more than the global patterns of where and when.
This approach helps me to argue that buildings themselves should be the
primary source of architectural research: that every building—cathedral or
bicycle shed, glamorous gallery or your own home—contains architectural,
cultural, technical, and historical knowledge. It also emphasizes the
buildings that you need to know to talk knowledgably with others who
think they already know about modern architecture. Its consequence,
however, is to reinforce the Euro-American mainstream, omitting buildings
and characters from other contexts. I’ve tried to mitigate this by including
some less familiar projects and introducing some familiar examples in less
familiar ways. Ultimately though, I hope this book will encourage you to
read further, to go beyond buildings designed largely by white Western men
in the most powerful countries in the world to explore less-charted but
equally important moder architectures.

Chapter 2
Iron and steel

A bridge to modernity

My story about modern architecture begins with an iron bridge completed
in 1779 (Figure 1). It’s only questionably modern and, for that matter, only
questionably architecture. But it illustrates the industrial cultures where
modern architecture started to form.

1. Iron Bridge, Ironbridge, Shropshire, UK, completed 1779. A
technological wonder of its time, which displayed and promoted a set
of emerging ideas about what later became called modernity. While
built from a new material—iron—it still subscribed to the traditional
image of a bridge built in masonry. (Fabricator: Abraham Darby III;
Architect: Thomas Pritchard.)

The bridge was made from five arched cast-iron ribs, spreading their load to
two masonry abutments, assembled without using nuts and bolts. The
bridge became so famous, because its construction was so novel, that the
town forming around it took its name. Ironbridge, sat in a mineral-rich
gorge in England’s West Midlands, became the crucible of the 18th
century’s Industrial Revolution.

The Iron Bridge was proposed by an architect, Thomas Pritchard—and it
bears his ornamental flourishes—but it was executed under the direction of

a fabricator, Abraham Darby III. The Darby family’s Coalbrookdale
foundry was then a world leader in iron production. The first Abraham
Darby had worked out how to use coked coal, rather than charcoal made
from timber, to raise temperatures in the blast furnaces where iron was
made. This yielded consistently higher quality iron at lower cost, made in
large furnaces that could run continuously. Coalbrookdale’s innovations in
the volume production of iron, and growing experience in fabricating iron
components, contributed not just to the bridge but to the whole Industrial
Revolution.

The Iron Bridge introduces four themes that recur throughout this book.
First, it indicates the beginnings of a shift in global culture, over two
centuries, from artisan manufacturing towards mass production. While the
components of the bridge were sourced nearby—using local ironstone, clay,
sand, limestone, coal, and water—it was assembled from a limited number
of repeated components. This anticipated a huge cultural shift. New
technologies enabled cheaper and quicker manufacturing, opening up
industrial production in fields—like textiles and furniture—that were
previously the province of artisans. This new industrial culture usually
separated design from making. Where seamstresses or joiners, for example,
made design decisions with their tools in hand, based on their experience of
working materials, designers began to emerge in various fields who
imagined artefacts and drew them for others to make. In consequence,
makers’ skills became increasingly channelled into the accurate
reproduction of given designs. While the figure of the architect emerged
well before mass production—out of ancient origins rediscovered in the
15th century—the modern idea of the professional who draws buildings got
shaped in association with this emerging idea of design. The modern notion
of construction as an industry emerged with it, gradually replacing old
priorities of art and craft in building with new ideas about efficiency and
predictability.

Second, the Iron Bridge illustrates the emergence of the idea of a single
global culture. Early mass production, like that in the Severn gorge, quickly
exceeded the stock of local raw materials. The hunger of new factories,
from blast foundries to textile mills, and the hunger of their owners for
profit, meant that materials and workers were sought elsewhere as local

supplies dwindled. Associated ideas about raw materials being
commodities, and individual workers combining into a collective called
labour, started to form the modern habit of imagining the world in terms of
resources to be exploited.

The more the machines produced, and the greater the demand for their
cheaper products, the wider the distribution of those products. Transport
infrastructures were constructed to bring in material and labour resources,
and to ship out manufactured ones. For example, in a short time at the end
of the 18th century, the River Severn flowing through Ironbridge became
linked to other rivers via a canal network connecting British cities, joined
with ports linked to global shipping. By the middle of the 19th century,
these canals were supplanted by railways that could move more goods and
people at higher speeds. In the later 20th century, railways themselves
became overtaken by motorways, air transport, and containerization. Thus,
the transport infrastructures made necessary by industry expanded and
accelerated during the modern period. They produced in their wake a global
culture where industry flourished, and where global consumption and mass
travel seemed to shrink distances and cultural differences.

This alliance of trade, industry, and shipping fuelled Western countries’
colonization of parts of Africa, Asia, and the Americas during the 18th and
19th centuries. For example, in northeast England, on the River Tyne rather
than the Severn, Lord Armstrong’s Elswick Works produced munitions,
ships, and hydraulic construction equipment. These were sold without
scruple to armies, militia, governments, and corporations including—
famously—both sides of the same conflict. Fuelled by technocratic
enterprises like Armstrong’s, colonialism opened up what became imagined
as the material and human resources of conquered lands to the new
industries. It brought enormous wealth to European and North American
captains of industry, and often significant suffering to the places and
peoples plundered. The novel goods and values exported by new industries
celebrated global commerce, market forces, and the idea of industry as
progress—which then seemed to become their inevitable consequence.

Just as the idea of a single global culture is latent in the reproduced
components of the Iron Bridge, so too are modern ideas of economy and
technology. Taken together, these constitute the third theme I argue that the
bridge illustrates. New industries—like Coalbrookdale Foundry—produced
massive social and cultural change in the 18th and early 19th centuries. The
population of England’s West Midlands, like much of Western Europe and
later the USA, shifted largely from rural agricultural work to urban
industrial work. Growing urban populations sustained industrial production
and encouraged the consumption of its outputs. The massive changes that
successive generations observed—the emergence of labour-saving devices,
for example, from the mangle to the fridge; or wonder drugs from
anaesthetics to antibiotics—became inextricably linked in people’s minds
with the idea of technology. And this association of technology with
progress, popularized through novel innovations, became inseparable from
modernity.

The reach of manufacturing industries and transport infrastructures
increasingly extended into almost every facet of everyday life. And the
global economy on which the modem idea of progress relied became
increasingly pervasive. The word ‘economy’ once referred to the frugal
management of a household, to an ancient villa and its land, sustaining a
society of people living and working there, standing for the idea that just
enough was sufficient. But the substantial costs of industrial production,
and the extravagant profits to be made from it, made loan finance—once
condemned as the evil of ‘usury’—more culturally acceptable. The
financiers made the biggest profits of all. In the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, colonialism and transport globalized finance at least as much as
they globalized the new industries.

The Iron Bridge also introduces a fourth idea, about architectural
‘imageability’. Whether or not it was the first iron bridge in the world—
that’s been debated—it was the first whose image became widely
distributed. At the time, its spindly see-through structure looked remarkable
to eyes accustomed to brick or stone. How could something so apparently
fragile be evidently so strong? The structure drew artists intrigued to depict
it. An exhibition celebrating the bridge’s bicentenary in 1979, held at
London’s Royal Academy, collected over fifty images made between 1750

and 1830. Pictures of the bridge, sat in its picturesque gorge, symbolized
the wonder of technology. And new media technologies—like engraving
and printing—allowed the widespread distribution of its imagery, lending it
global significance. Like many famous works of modern architecture,
images of the Iron Bridge seemed to surpass the structure’s own physical
presence. Its depiction, in paintings and engravings, acquired a currency
beyond the original, admired by a much bigger audience than had seen the
bridge first hand, making it a striking symbol of the idea of the new.

The Iron Bridge also illustrates imageability in another way. Made in iron,
assembled from multiple components, it’s constructed in the same form as a
masonry arch. Effectively, it took what was then the known image of a
bridge—the arch—and reproduced it in a new material. Arches suit how
brick and stone behave in compression (when loaded with weight from
above), distributing loads evenly from central keystones to the ground. Iron,
meanwhile, has different properties. Made into chain links and cables, it
performs better in tension (where forces tend to pull it apart). This was
exploited in 1801 in the inventor James Finlay’s design for Jacob’s Creek
Bridge in Westmorland County, Pennsylvania, suspending a deck from iron
trusses and establishing the basic components of the modern suspension
bridge. Later structures, like engineer Thomas Telford’s Menai Bridge in
North Wales, 1820, and Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s Clifton Suspension
Bridge in Bristol, UK, 1834, consolidated a new logic for iron construction
and a new image for iron bridges derived more directly from the logic of
the material. While Ironbridge’s Iron Bridge was innovative, it was
nevertheless constrained in its designers’ imaginations by their prevailing
idea of what a bridge ought to look like.

This raises an important point—that there remain deeply embedded cultural
assumptions about the imagery of certain types of buildings and structures.
Children learn culturally coded images so they can distinguish a living
room from a street, for example, or a house from an office, and people think
they know what buildings look like after that. But these codes become so
powerful that designers take time to challenge them. More significantly,
they become so powerful that people find it hard to accept new architectural
images when familiar ones are challenged.

I want to mention one last way that the Iron Bridge anticipated modern
architecture. Recent surveys of the bridge showed how its repeated
components were adjusted individually, during manufacturing, to fit their
neighbours. There is, it’s been shown, tens of millimetres’ difference
between seemingly identical components. The ideal of mass production in
architecture has always been that: an ideal. Despite ongoing enthusiasm for
industrialization, particular builders usually constructed modern buildings
on particular sites for particular clients, from the drawings of particular
designers. During the 20th century, it grew less common for architects to
design every detail of buildings and more common for them to specify
mass-produced components, like prefabricated doorsets, roof trusses, or
kitchen units. Only rarely, however, were whole buildings mass produced.
Nevertheless, the image of mass production remained insistent in modern
architecture, to the point where bespoke buildings were sometimes made to
look prefabricated to assert their modernity. Commentators keen on
industrial production argued repeatedly over more than a century that
prefabrication was the imminent future of architecture, without it being
fulfilled on any scale.

Iron and modern science

It’s remarkable that iron manufacturing ever became widespread. Iron is
extracted from mineral, from iron ore, at a boiling point of 1,535 °C,
involving fierce heat and light. This doesn’t produce pure iron but an
impure substance—named ‘pig iron’ after the shape of the casting beds
once used—which is hard and brittle. This then gets remelted, during which
time it is carefully ‘decarburized’ to control the level of carbon and
impurities like sulphur, improving the strength of the material, before being
left once again to cool.

It’s sometimes claimed that the engineering innovations of the Industrial
Revolution emerged from modern science. But, until the mid-19th century,
the history of iron manufacturing was largely the history of trial and error.
Telford’s and Brunel’s bridges, for example, were worked out from instinct
and experience, preceding any comprehensive theory of structures. Thomas
Newcomen’s and James Watt’s 18th-century work developing steam
engines—despite the latter’s theoretical research into chemistry late in life

—emerged from the workshop and not from calculation. Likewise, the
Darby family’s endeavours at Coalbrookdale were based on testing and
observation. Early 19th-century engineering aspired to scientific authority,
however, and science encouraged the culture in which engineering
flourished.

The modern idea of science—seeking mathematical descriptions of natural
phenomena out of systematic experiments—emerged in the West in the 16th
and 17th centuries. It was popularized by the reputations of figures like
Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543), who proposed in 1549 that the Earth
revolved around the sun and not vice versa, and Isaac Newton (1642-1727),
whose physics linked astronomical observations with Earth-bound ones,
producing theories of optics and calculus. Theories like these emphasized
rational analysis, encouraging a gradual shift from a God-fearing medieval
society, where humans imagined themselves subservient to the natural
world, towards a 20th-century secular condition where science and
technology made humans feel they could control the world.

After the construction of the Iron Bridge, there were rapid improvements in
making iron stronger and more predictable. Henry Cort patented the
puddling process in 1783, stirring molten iron to draw in oxygen and burn
out carbon. In 1832, John Gibbons tried different geometries of blast
furnace, significantly increasing production capacity. By the mid-19th
century, wrought iron became a reliable construction material, albeit that
mass-produced components were still tested by hand and eye to ensure their
soundness. It was only towards the end of that century that the design of
iron structures became more scientific, when engineers learnt to calculate
stresses and deflections accurately.

The St Geneviéve Library in Paris was designed by architect Henri
Labrouste between 1838 and 1850, at the point between early experiments
in mass producing iron components and their widespread use in building,
between trial and error and applied science. The twin iron vaults of its lofty
reading room were tied to thick stone piers lining the perimeter, connected
by arched openings containing tall bookstacks with windows above (Figure

2). In conjunction with the building’s spare decoration, the vaults
anticipated the light and airy qualities of modern buildings.

2, St Geneviéve Library, Paris, France, 1850. Slender iron vaults
contained by masonry walls, built at a time poised between trial and
error in engineering and the emergence of reliable structural
calculations. Its architect, Henri Labrouste, sought a new resolution
between novel technologies of construction and the idea that
architecture could be a vital expression of culture.

St Geneviéve Library was controversial in mid-19th-century Paris. It
rejected the prevailing idea, promoted by that city’s famous architecture
school, L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts, that architecture should involve the artful
composition of decorative forms derived from scholarly study of the orders
of classical architecture. The library instead appeared strikingly plain.
Structure and decoration were effectively separated out. Decoration was
applied to panels set into, and between, the primary structure, expressing
the structural design of the building visually. These ideas chimed with

emerging architectural thinkers, notably John Ruskin, whose book Modern
Painters (first published anonymously in 1843) argued that art should be
honest to the realities of nature; expanded in his Seven Lamps of
Architecture, 1849, which promoted truth—including the honest expression
of structural forces—as essential to beauty and life. For these reasons—of
material, structure, and decoration—the St Geneviéve library was later
claimed as a progenitor of modern architecture. But it also stood for
emerging modernity in another way.

Labrouste knew the novelist Victor Hugo, who remains famous for The
Hunchback of Notre Dame, written at the time of the July Revolution in
France in 1830 and published in 1831. Hugo asked Labrouste to comment
on a draft chapter criticizing scholarly Beaux Arts architecture. Set in Notre
Dame Cathedral in 1482, the chapter follows an encounter between
archdeacon Claude Frollo and a character who turns out to be King Louis
XI. At a key moment, Frollo glances down at a printed book on the table
and then up through a window to the towers of the Cathedral. ‘This’ (the
book), he reflects wistfully, ‘will kill that’ (the Cathedral). Hugo’s novel
was set when the invention of the printing press, by Johannes Gutenberg in
1436, allowed the widespread distribution of books. But Hugo made a
contemporary point. He claimed, via Frollo, that architecture was
understood before printing, before mass production, not just in terms of
shelter or as a container of human activities but instead as a form of
knowledge. And that knowledge—carved in stone in the great buildings of
human culture—was a kind of cultural currency that could be read by the
people whose lives those great buildings touched. Architecture, he
suggested, was a force for social integration because it expressed shared
symbols. Hugo’s character argued that architecture was losing its uniting
power to the page, prophesizing that the spread of Copernican and
Newtonian science, through printing, would encourage the culture of
industrialization to take over every facet of human life. Hugo thus took aim
at the Beaux Arts architects who derived their designs from book learning,
copying, and recopying forms from the Greeks and Romans, forgetting, he
thought, how to think for themselves. They made empty copies of ancient
architecture, he implied, in a city where Notre Dame showed how
architecture once embodied the latest knowledge, and where it could do that
again.

The historian Neil Levine argued that Labrouste’s design for his strange,
plain library—with its spindly iron vaults and resistance to Classical style—
was an optimistic response to Hugo’s criticism: an attempt to make
architecture a cultural force again, this time reflecting the 19th century’s
emerging knowledge. The library’s plain stone facades were carved with
810 names in twenty-seven panels, presenting a roll call of thinkers
collected in the library (all male), organized in chronological order from the
Old Testament figure Moses to the Swedish scientist Bezelius, who died in
1848 when the names were carved. The architecture of the library thus
echoed and celebrated the printed page. If the book had killed ancient
architecture, as Hugo supposed, then St Geneviéve Library suggested that
architecture could be made afresh out of the new scientific world of the
book. The names on the library’s fagades described the huge intellectual
shift from medieval European cultures dominated by a single Christian
God, to the so-called rational thought of 19th-century modern science and
technology. Designed at the beginning of the so-called Second Republic in
France, the names also described a parallel, connected shift towards ideas of
modern industrial democracy, away from the absolute monarchies of the
European past. The library’s vaults—made in iron, the technological
material of the moment—were physically and metaphorically tied to stone
walls whose carved names expressed the intellectual forces that iron
seemed to represent. The vaults stood for their architect’s premonition that a
meaningful modern architecture was possible, derived from modem science
and the technical culture of industrial production.

The library highlighted an apparent tension emerging at that time between
engineering and architecture, between new technologies of construction and
an older idea of architecture as an expression of culture. How, it seemed to
ask, might the organization and imagery of architecture embrace the culture
of modernity? This fraught question preoccupied certain architects well into
the next century.

Space and industrial culture

Railways arrived in European and American cities in the mid-19th century,
and their promoters’ lofty terminus stations—frequently boasting dramatic
iron vaults—became understood in retrospect as further addressing this

question, shifting attention from architecture’s facades to its interior spaces.
St Pancras Station, London, 1868, is a famous example. Its train shed’s
arched trusses—designed by engineer William Barlow—soared 75 metres
over the tracks without intermediate columns. Still influenced by older
ideas about civic decorum, however, this striking display of iron’s potential
was enclosed within masonry walls and concealed from the street by the
ten-storey Midland Grand Hotel: a Gothic Revival fairy tale decorated with
gables and fancy balconies, designed by architect George Gilbert Scott.
Architecture and engineering, trainshed and station building, were
frequently separated—physically and intellectually—in such railway
terminals. But it was the iron sheds that most captured peoples’
imaginations. It’s no coincidence that painter Edouard Manet chose the
trainshed of a Parisian station, buzzing with activity and filled evocatively
with steam, to depict the emerging atmosphere of modernity—rather than
the conventional station building—in his painting Gare Saint-Lazare, 1873.

At that time, engineers—not architects—were most comfortable with the
structural opportunities, imagery, and space-enclosing potential of iron.
Some, like Gustave Eiffel and Joseph Paxton, came from working-class
backgrounds and transcended rigid class structures through
entrepreneurship and technical cunning. Paxton and Eiffel cultivated the
image of self-made practical people that just got on with things, in
opposition to scholarly gentleman architects who, the implication was,
dithered and delayed. They reimagined iron not just as a material for roofs
within masonry walls, but as structural framing that could define the spaces
of buildings. Indeed, they helped define the idea of ‘space’ as the end result
of modern architecture: a notion still forming as recently as the 1920s.

Paxton was a gardener turned engineer. He earned his reputation as the
Duke of Devonshire’s fixer, transforming the Duke’s park at Chatsworth,
UK, with hydraulic fountains, water displays, and a new village to replace
one previously disrupting the Duke’s view. Paxton’s iron-framed glass
house there—the Great Conservatory, 1837—inspired the commission for
another at London’s Kew Gardens, 1849, housing a giant waterlily ‘found’
in the colony of British Guiana. When a pet project of Queen Victoria’s
consort, Prince Albert—for a temporary Great Exhibition of technological
wonders and colonial ‘curiosities’ in London’s Hyde Park—ran into

difficulties in 1851, Paxton proposed a giant greenhouse to contain the
exhibits: a ‘Crystal Palace’ made from mass-produced components—
conceived for speed and efficiency of construction (Figure 3).

3. Crystal Palace, London, UK, 1851. A temporary display-case for
globalized modernity, constructed with great ingenuity in iron and
glass. It illustrated vividly the emerging connections between global
finance and colonial exploitation, between ideas about progress and a
universal free market, and industrial production and the idea of the
state.

Paxton devised a system of structural iron elements holding the largest
sheets of glass then available, fixed into timber ‘Paxton gutters’ supported
on a grid of iron trusses, columns, and beams. Those trusses were raised
into place using horse power, aided by counter-weighted blocks. Special
wagons were designed, whose wheels fitted into the gutters, on which

glaziers lay to fix the panes quickly. Bolt holes in the ironwork were
machined in the foundry to save filing them smooth on site. And special
machines were designed to produce several grooved and bevelled sash-bars
at once out of a single plank of timber. The shell of the Crystal Palace—
then the largest enclosed space in the world—was erected in just four
months. Opening panels were added at high level to extract rising hot air,
and a timber slatted floor allowed cool air to be drawn in to replace it at low
level, with the Paxton gutters profiled to collect condensation. These
climate control measures were carefully considered but they couldn’t
mitigate the overheating and overlighting problems of putting an exhibition
in a large greenhouse in summer, and various exhibitors—including
Armstrong’s Elswick Works and Coalbrookdale Foundry—hung giant
drapes to shade their exhibits. Attracting visitors in vast numbers, the
exhibition illustrated modern ideas and helped establish a new popular
enchantment with technological progress. The Crystal Palace stood for
fresh mythologies celebrating rational science and technical innovation, and
a gradual shift away from traditional religious mythologies. Moreover, it
served as a display case for the emerging products of modern globalized
trade, illustrating vividly the burgeoning connections between global
finance and colonial exploitation, ideas about progress and a universal free
market, and industrial production and the idea of the state.

Refining ideas about mass production already latent in the Iron Bridge, the
Crystal Palace also anticipated the modern idea of space. Visitors circulated
inside its grid of slender columns and spidery trusses, with countless
glimpses appearing and disappearing in a perpetual interlacing of structure.
In long perspective, the grids of columns and glazing bars stretched almost
to infinity. The palace’s volume thus exemplified the mathematical
conception of space: as a grid measured in equal increments on x, y, and z
axes, as a field extending to infinity in all directions.

If moving around the Crystal Palace felt strikingly new, then the first
experiences of climbing the curving latticework of Eiffel’s Tower must have
seemed something else again. Gustave Eiffel, son of a German forester,
began as an apprentice engineer before founding a design-build firm
serving the railway boom, opening metal workshops in a Parisian suburb.
He made a reputation building large-span iron bridges: at Oporto, Portugal,

1875; and the world’s largest arch, plus a series of pylons, at Garabit in
France’s Massif Central, 1884. Eiffel also engineered the Statue of Liberty
—shipped to New York as a gift from France, 1881—developing a
mathematical solution for the tricky structural problem of raising Liberty’s
torch-bearing arm outwards from her body.

Eiffel’s tower was the centrepiece of another temporary exhibition of
technological wonders—the 1889 Paris World’s Fair—housed in pavilions
around its base. Designed for rapid construction, it tapped his previous
experience. The tower was effectively a giant bridge pylon without the
bridge, sat on foundations made using pressurized waterproof caissons,
invented for building footings in rivers, allowing it to be constructed on
sodden ground.

Opened at a time when few aviators had flown, and aerial views were
figments of artists’ imaginations, the public found the tower’s three lofty
viewing platforms spectacular. Equally striking was the experience of
moving upwards through its structural legs in innovative elevators,
themselves at the forefront of technology. Glimpses soared skyward,
framing distant prospects: a cinematic experience before the popularization
of cinema. Spiral stairs—sometimes locked deep in the structure and
sometimes flying precariously outside—became panoramic viewing
devices. The tower was not universally popular, especially among Paris’s
elite—one of whom quipped that he preferred to eat at its restaurants
because it was only there that he couldn’t see it on the skyline. Sensitive to
such criticism, Eiffel talked up the tower’s patriotic role for making military
observations in the event of invasion, and topped it with a meteorological
laboratory to associate the tower with scientific enterprise. And it quickly
became a tourist staple, now characterizing Paris in countless depictions,
models, and novelty paperweights.

Around the time the Eiffel Tower was imagined, the idea of space was
being contested in German language art criticism by theorists like Conrad
Fiedler, Gottfried Semper, and August Schmarsow. In 1846, Karl Bétticher
had understood architectural style as an integration of systems of
production and symbolization, proposing a new, similar, integration for

iron. In 1878, Semper argued that architecture should express,
monumentally, the structures of society. Architecture, he believed, should
give order to culture, and symbolize culture, particularly through its
Bekleidung, meaning ‘clothing’ or ‘cladding’. That word ‘cladding’ became
important. It helped modern architects to imagine facades as curtains hung
around spaces, rather than as heavy structures enclosing them. Meanwhile,
Schmarsow’s ‘room theory’, 1893, argued that dynamic bodily movement
around space offered a better way to appreciate architecture than the static
viewing of forms.

Adrian Forty has highlighted that such theories about space—which entered
English-language debates about modern architecture only in the 20th
century via writers including Adolf Loos, Alois Riegel, and Siegfried
Giedion—were adopted only imprecisely by modern architects, who
conflated them awkwardly. Forty reflected how modern architects came to
understand space—imprecisely—as both something static, contained within
walls, and something dynamic, flowing through architecture. They
imagined it as an abstract mathematical grid but also understood it from the
bodily viewpoint of individuals moving around. They saw space as
simultaneously tightly bounded, and with infinite extent. And they
imagined it both as an abstract idea, and as ‘stuff’ that architects could
shape. The emerging vocabulary of space in modem architecture was thus
sometimes muddled. But it’s no coincidence that it began forming when the
fleshless skeletons of the early railway terminals, Crystal Palace, and Eiffel
Tower were constructed, because the heightened experiences of those
structures illustrated vividly how the idea of space could be imagined.

Sullivan, Wright, and the separation of wall from structure

A sequence of innovations in the latter part of the 19th century transformed
iron technology, resulting in the widespread production of a less brittle
variant called mild steel. The inventor Henry Bessemer successfully blew
cold air through molten iron at his London bronze-powder factory in 1856,
wholly ‘decarburising’ it. He licensed his process to manufacturers, but it
tumed out that his innovation relied on low-phosphorous iron ore—which
wasn’t widely available—and it stalled. It took amateur chemist Sidney
Gilchrist Thomas to resolve how to remove phosphorous from iron to solve

the problem, successfully producing a batch of steel in April 1879. Parallel,
developments in iron rolling—by John Alleyne, for example, to fabricate
sections of St Pancras station’s roof—matured through the 1860s. By 1890,
the combination of the basic Bessemer process with improved rolling mills
—alongside other refinements—resulted in bigger sections and longer
lengths of steel whose chemistry could be controlled to achieve different
material properties. In architecture, this meant that trusses and arches made
of smaller, brittle iron components could be replaced, up to certain lengths,
by single, ductile steel beams or columns. And trusses made of mild steel
elements could cover longer spans. Steel construction thus became easier,
faster, and cheaper than iron. The new material eventually yielded new
architectural imagery, but it took architects decades to work that out.

By 1890, technical initiative in steel production had shifted from Europe to
America. Chicago was an important centre; characterized, into the 20th
century, by sparks from its Bessemer converters puncturing night-time
views of Lake Michigan. Various architects from Chicago’s substantial
German immigrant community knew Semper’s ideas, but the rapid
development of steel-framed buildings there owed more to commercial
motivations than theoretical ones. Chicago was destroyed in a catastrophic
fire in 1871. As reconstruction gathered pace, soaring land values
encouraged developers and architects to build high, maximizing the lettable
area on each plot to maximize revenues. After the inventor Elisha Otis
made hydraulic elevators safe, increasing the number of floors that could be
accessed easily, the primary constraint on tall buildings became the capacity
for structural masonry to bear load. The eighteen-storey Monadnock
Building in Chicago’s downtown ‘Loop’, 1893, designed by Burnham and
Root, demonstrated the limits of what was possible in brick, its massive
flared plinth illustrating the bulk of masonry needed to support the walls
above.

The idea that steel frames could exceed the height limits of brickwork came
not from architects but the local steel industry. The first building to hang its
external walls from a Bessemer steel frame was the Home Insurance
Building in the Loop, designed by William LeBaron Jenney, 1885; followed
by Holabird and Roche’s Tacoma Building, 1888. Rapid construction was
achieved by suspending brick, stone, and terracotta work from the frame,

permitting its completion in advance of the external walls. Those walls—no
longer loadbearing—thus became separated conceptually from the
building’s structure, echoing Semper’s ideas about cladding. Louis Sullivan,
of Chicago firm Adler and Sullivan, developed this approach in the
Wainwright Building, St Louis, 1890, and the Guaranty Building, Buffalo,
1895. However, just as Ironbridge’s iron bridge took the shape of a masonry
arch, early steel-framed buildings designed by Chicago architects seemed
constrained by established architectural imagery. Sullivan initially
understood these projects primarily as a decorative problem about the
proper expression of tall buildings, more than an opportunity for a new
architectural logic.

Adler and Sullivan’s substantial, complex, intricately detailed Auditorium
Building in Chicago’s Loop was completed in 1889, wrapping an opera
house with offices, hotel rooms, and a seventeen-storey tower. Its ingenious
section, constructed in steel frame within masonry walls, resolved
practically the differing needs of diverse accommodation. The theatre was
the first lit by electric light, also employing a novel system to circulate air.
And its innovative steel and concrete ‘raft’ foundations were loaded up with
weights that were removed while the building was constructed to avoid
different parts settling at different rates. Integrating its framed structure
with new building services, the Auditorium Building seemed to be
imagined as a technological machine.

Critic Colin Rowe argued in a 1956 essay, ‘Chicago Frame’, that—although
Sullivan and his contemporaries didn’t grasp the full implications of what
they were doing—they changed architecture. They integrated new
technologies into building, valuing practicality, simplicity, and innovation.
More importantly, they pointed the way towards a new steel-framed
architectural logic, illustrating the separation of cladding from structure.
Rowe emphasized the significance of this. “The frame has come to possess
a value for contemporary architecture,’ he wrote,

equivalent to that of the column for classical antiquity and the Renaissance ... The frame
establishes throughout the building a common ratio to which all the parts are related; and, like
the vaulting bay in the Gothic cathedral, it prescribes a system to which all parts are
subordinate.

Rowe linked the innovations of downtown Chicago’s steel-framed
‘skyscrapers’ with the work of another architect working in that city’s
suburbs, Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright, who assisted Adler and Sullivan with
the Auditorium Building, tested a set of ideas through a sequence of brick-
and timber-built houses. These included: the Ward Willits House, Highland
Park, Illinois, 1901; Darwin Martin House, Buffalo, 1904; and Frederick
Robie House, Chicago, 1907. Before modernity, most buildings in the West
were constructed from masonry and timber: a combination controlled by the
timber sizes that could be cut efficiently from logs, preferring floor spans of
6 metres or less. Masonry and timber thus tend to produce groups of
rectangular rooms enclosed by loadbearing walls holding up the floors, their
architectural logic implying a series of cellular rooms surrounded by heavy
walls with small openings. Wright’s designs tested, within the constraints of
those materials, how far conventional four-square masonry boxes could be
dissolved. He experimented with: interlocking spaces at the corners of
rooms, achieved using concealed steel lintels; a central hearth expressed as
a ‘pinwheel’ around which those interlocking spaces were arranged;
horizontal lines expressed in roofs and window strips to cheat the
appearance of weighty masonry; and interior spaces linked to their
surrounding landscape by loggias and plane walls extending outwards from
the buildings.

Images of Wright’s work were published in Germany in 1911. They became
influential in Europe, like images of Chicago’s steel-framed towers had
previously, and both contributed to the slow emergence of a distinctive
architectural expression for the steel frame there during the first half of the
20th century. While the frame developed quickly as a commercial and
technical expedience in America, straightforwardly symbolizing trade and
industry, Rowe argued, European architects only embraced it slowly,
agonizing about it instead as a new spatial idea.

New images of modernity

The architectural idea of the steel frame became represented strikingly in
Vladimir Tatlin’s Monument to the Third International, 1920—an unbuilt
project for which only a handful of drawings and model photographs
survive. The Monument followed the 1917 Russian Revolution, when

communists deposed the ruling elite, and began instituting new patterns of
collective living. It was claimed for ‘constructivism’: a movement calling
for art to ‘go into the factory, where the real body of life is made’, rejecting
elite art to propose instead ‘non-utilitarian constructions’, fusing life with
art through industry and mass production. Far from the rectangular grids of
office buildings in Chicago, Tatlin’s tower proposed a leaning spiral of
columns and diagonal bracing, propped on an inclined pylon, with three
glass rooms locked within. A cube, housing legislative assemblies, would
revolve on its axis once a year. Above that, a pyramid for executive bodies
would revolve once a month. On top of that, a cylinder, rotating once a day,
would issue forth newspapers, proclamations, and pamphlets (spinning the
spin doctors!). The tower’s form derived from structural logic but was
conceived primarily as an image of dynamism, symbolizing agitation and
propaganda: a twisting motion frozen in steel, with mobile rooms inside. It
reinvented Pieter Bruegel the Elder’s famous 1563 painting of the Tower of
Babel, and the Eiffel Tower, substituting their supposedly static images with
a dynamic depiction of space. And space, here, was not layered into
rectilinear floors and rooms but instead became a remarkable three-
dimensional volume. The image of Tatlin’s tower was unique in modern
architecture, sticking in architects’ imaginations.

Another image of the steel frame that became a key reference was the
administration block of the Fagus shoe-last factory at Afeld, Germany,
1913, designed by Walter Gropius and Hannes Meyer (Figure 4). It’s the
first project I’ve discussed here that no-one would dispute calling modern—
sometimes presented as a decisive step in liberating construction from
artistic ornament. While Gropius’s star has waned in histories of modern
architecture, he was equal in fame to Le Corbusier in the 1930s and 1940s.
The Fagus factory was striking for three novel elements. First, in front of its
steel columns faced in brick were large panels of glass, hung from the
frame, seemingly applied to the walls as planes. This was subsequently
hailed (inaccurately) as the first glass ‘curtain wall’—named after Semper’s
ideas. Second, the traditional pitched roof was rejected, in favour of a flat
roof (in fact laid with a slight ‘fall’ for draining rainwater), an element that
became an inescapable image of modernity. Third, structural steel columns
were shifted away from the corners of the building where, instead, the glass
curtains met at a slender steel glazing bar, with opening lights provided

right at the junction. At a time when masonry walls were normal, always
thickest at corners for structural reasons, this detail—linked to Wright’s
opening up of corners—appeared strikingly light and free-floating,
apparently suggesting that interior and exterior spaces could flow into one
another. Thus, the corner window—liberated from structural constraints by
technology—became another key element of modern architecture.

4. Administration block for the Fagus factory, Afeld, Germany, 1913.
A key reference for early modern architects. Its distinctive components
—flat roof, structural frame, ‘curtain walls’, and corner windows—
became decisive elements of what Reyner Banham later called modern
architecture’s ‘teenage uniform’. (Architects: Walter Gropius and
Hannes Meyer.)

Inspired by Wright’s houses, architects continued to test how spaces could
be imagined if rigid masonry rooms became dissolved and walls became
understood instead as surfaces in space. Steel allowed floors to be
supported on columns or walls in fewer places than timber. Rather than
enclosing a series of cells, walls could thus be reimagined as screening but
not enclosing activities, separating them but not parcelling them up into
compartments: as free-standing planes within larger spaces. These planes
could be imagined as slipping out of buildings, past a perimeter glass
screen, blurring divisions between inside and outside, encouraged by the
notion of ‘space’ as flowing and fluid.

This idea was influenced by modern painting in the late 1910s and early
1920s. Cubist paintings, like those of Fernand Léger and Juan Gris—or
Expressionist paintings like Wassily Kandinsky’s—broke up and abstracted
figures and everyday objects into fragmented compositions using flattened
perspectives and multiple perspective viewpoints. Rather than depicting
conventional scenes, these painters instead composed lines and blocks of
colour in the space of the painting. Various modern architects imagined they
were doing something similar, arranging walls as lines and planes in space,
and only then making a weathertight enclosure around them. And their plan
drawings sometimes looked like compositions by Kandinsky or Léger.

A house in Utrecht, the Netherlands, planned for a young widow, Truus
Schréder-Schrader, and her three children, by furniture designer Gerrit
Rietveld, 1924, provided an extraordinary demonstration of this architecture
of planes (Figure 5). Client and designer egged each other on to make
something remarkable, and the small house seemed less like a building than
a giant piece of inhabitable furniture. Certain walls were imagined as
sliding or folding planes. Key furniture elements were fitted, with mobile
pieces expressed as folding and sliding planes at another scale. Most of the
detached furniture was also mobile. Rooms could be opened up in the
daytime while, in the evening, walls could be slid out to enclose a bedroom
and bathroom with, for example, a sofa folding into a bed and a table
hinged down. Incorporating the latest technology—mains electricity, central
heating, and even an early dishwasher—the Schréder House was
delightfully gadgety.

5. Schréder House, Utrecht, the Netherlands, 1924, Walls, balconies,
and columns oversail one another to suggest a collection of free-
standing planes grouped artistically in space. Primary colours were
artfully applied to the edges of surfaces, inside and out, to heighten the
visual illusion of floating surfaces. Constructionally, it is a hybrid of
steel, masonry, and reinforced concrete combined to achieve artistic
effects. (Designer: Gerrit Rietveld.)

Constructionally, it was a hybrid of steel, masonry, and reinforced concrete,
composed to achieve artistic effects. But it was immediately striking. Its
elevations were imagined not as independent faces, but as parts of a three-
dimensional composition of interior and exterior planes, articulated by
hingeing, folding, and sliding elements. Slender steel columns appeared to
suspend planes in mid-air. Walls, balconies, and supports over-sailed one
another to suggest, visually, a collection of free-standing objects grouped
artistically in space, clearly different from loadbearing masonry walls.
Primary colours—tred, yellow, and blue—were artfully applied to the edges
of surfaces, inside and out, against a backdrop of white, to heighten the

visual illusion of floating surfaces. These colours related to cubist and
expressionist art, specifically the contemporary Dutch art movement De
Stijl (The Style). The result was a striking demonstration of a planar
architectural logic whose potential was extended by modern materials.

Gropius developed his articulation of the Fagus Factory, without its brick
panels, at another framed structure finished in 1926: the headquarters of the
Bauhaus school of design in Dessau, Germany, where he became the first
head. The building consolidated an appreciation of the visual detachment of
planes, as developed through the work of Wright, De Stijl, and Rietveld.
‘Part hippie commune, part zen monastery’ (as Richard Weston put it), the
curriculum of Gropius’s Bauhaus reflected its new home—emphasizing
engineering, geometry, and industrial craft, with the addition of radical
politics. In its early years, it was imagined as a reinvented medieval craft
guild, and Bauhaus students worked directly with materials, including steel.
They integrated art and engineering, craft and machine production, product
design and manufacturing. Striking furniture, paintings, sculptures, objects,
and (later) architecture resulted, envisaged as symbols of modernity. And
the Bauhaus ethos went on to inspire numerous modern architects. By the
1930s, thanks partly to images produced there, curtain walls, flat roofs,
corner windows, and apparently free-standing planes became linked
together into what Reyner Banham later called ‘the teenage uniform of
modern architecture’.

Mies, on campus

The first of the four anointed superheroes of modern architecture I’1l
introduce here refined the logic of steel-framed architecture obsessively.
Known to architects simply as ‘Mies’ (1886-1969), he was born Ludwig
Mies at Aachen on the German—Dutch border. The family firm made stone
fireplaces, and he acquired an early sense of the dignity of materials and the
craftspeople who worked them. In 1922—spending time with artists from
the Dada movement who deliberately cultivated their personas—he
reinvented himself as Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, adding his mother’s
surname and the ‘van der’ which hinted (without basis) at Dutch nobility.
Mies began his career as a draughtsman at the Berlin office of architect

Peter Behrens from 1910-11, overlapping there with Gropius, Meyer, and,
briefly, an odd Swiss man who later styled himself Le Corbusier.

Alongside his practical training, Mies read voraciously in philosophy,
history, and art criticism, encouraged by the philosopher Alois Riehl who
was an early client. Detlef Mertins has argued that Mies took from his
apprenticeship with Behrens the idea of a quest for architectural forms, to
suit the modern age, which could be seen as universal. From the work of
Dutch architect H.P. Berlage, he became interested in a handful of so-called
‘normal forms and types’: basic shapes supposedly drawn from ancient
traditions. From Gropius, Bruno Taut, and the so-called November Group,
he took the idea that creativity, freedom, and social justice were connected.
And, from Catholic philosopher Romano Guardini, he understood the
purpose of life as directing the human spirit into the future. The resulting
Mies was highly contradictory: a curious spiritual, non-political, socialist
authoritarian. He was hard enough to place in interwar Germany that he was
both commissioned to design a memorial to the murdered communists Karl
Liebknecht and Rosa Luxembourg, 1926, and remained able to practice
modern architecture after it was censured by the Nazis following their rise
to power in 1933, until they decisively pronounced it ‘degenerate’ in 1937.

In that year, Mies was invited to design a house in the American state of
Wyoming. His reputation preceded him, based on a pavilion he’d designed
for a 1929 expo in Barcelona—a remarkable exercise in the architecture of
planes—and on his role as the last head of the Bauhaus before it closed in
1933. On an extended visit, Mies negotiated an appointment as a professor
with what became Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago,
including a commission to masterplan its new campus at Bronzeville on the
city’s Near South Side. He thus became poised to bring together—in
Chicago—European thinking about the steel frame as a symbol of
modernity, with American talent for steel fabrication, in conjunction with
the planar thinking previously cultivated by Wright, Gropius, and Rietveld.

Mies and his colleagues treated the IIT project like a scientific experiment.
They sought a rational planning grid for the whole site, testing alternative
geometries for combinations of laboratories, lecture theatres, and

classrooms, eventually determining that a 7.3-metre grid could
accommodate them all successfully. This grid was laid across the twelve-
block site as a device for organizing individual buildings and the rooms
inside them. The grid—symbolizing ideas of space and mathematical
objectivity—reflected Mies’s belief that the planning of buildings should be
primarily a technical and rational exercise.

Over nearly fifteen years, Mies’s office designed a sequence of low-rise
rectangular blocks within IIT’s grid. The first, a three-storey engineering
lab—the Minerals and Metals Research Building, 1947—established the
formula (Figure 6). Its primary structure was a welded steel frame on a
regular module, expressed externally and internally, with special attention
paid to the detailing of the corners. Echoing the Fagus factory, its steel
frame was infilled with just two materials: glass ‘curtains’—set in slender
steel glazing bars—and panels of brickwork. To emphasize honestly that the
brick was infill and not supporting structure, it was set forward from the
frame as a visually separate plane. This assembly was topped with a flat
roof hidden behind the steel capping beam, with hidden gutters. The facades
were understood as a straightforward visual consequence of the spaces
inside, and the means of construction. Windowless end elevations—a grid
of welded steels and brick infill panels—were likened by Mies fans to the
abstract modern paintings of Piet Mondrian.

6. Minerals and Metals Research Building, Illinois Institute of
Technology (IIT), Chicago, USA, 1947. The first in a sequence of
buildings laid out on a grid on the IIT campus, seeking to perfect the
ideal image for modern steel campus buildings. (Architect: Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe.)

Wishnick Hall, and Alumni Memorial Hall, 1946, and the Metallurgical and
Chemical Engineering Building, 1947, tested variations of the formula,
exploring different corner and capping details, welding together
combinations of I-section, rectangular hollow section, and flat plate steels
to achieve subtly different effects. Extended through multiple projects at
IIT, Mies’s office engaged in the obsessive refinement of an architectural
system, seeking to isolate ideal forms for campus buildings. Differences
between successive buildings are barely discernible to non-specialists, but
fans understood their development as a rigorous, spiritual quest to pare

architecture down to basic forms and proportions. ‘Less is more,’ Mies
proclaimed.

IIT’s architecture school, S.R. Crown Hall, 1956 (Figure 7), is frequently
acknowledged as the pinnacle of the group, although it’s an exception,
disobeying the grid, and owing less to its neighbours than a spectacular, if
largely uninhabitable, house designed by Mies’s office for Edith Famsworth
at Plano, Illinois, 1951. That house was conceived as a glass-walled box
almost hovering above the ground, its rooms subdivided only with
furniture, with a supporting steel frame placed outside the walls. Crown
Hall’s fully glazed upper storey, like Farnsworth House, comprised a large
single space, interrupted only by two stairs and a handful of timber screens.
It sat on a half-buried basement containing a library, workshop, and
teaching rooms, with the steel frame again placed outside the building,
supporting a secondary order of smaller steels holding the glazing.

7. S.R. Crown Hall, ITT, Chicago, USA, 1947, The exception that
proved the rule on the IIT campus: an apparently hovering glass box,
its supporting steel frame placed outside the walls, containing a single
studio space, with ‘servant spaces’ in the basement below. Historians
have understood it as a modern reinvention of the classical temple,
poised above the ground on a plinth. (Architect: Ludwig Mies van der
Rohe.)

Crown Hall was a modern abstraction of a classical Greek temple, with a
stepped base, columns, and intricately judged proportions. Its single studio
room symbolized rational modern space. That room’s ceiling—dropped to
hide the upper glazing bars of the perimeter window frames—was inscribed
with a grid, seemingly extending into the infinite distance. The glass walls
were clear at the top and obscured with milky film below, focusing the
students’ view on the sky and trees—understood as universal symbols of
the natural world—rather than the messiness of passers-by. The fact of so

many students sharing a large room, their desks arranged in orderly rows,
produced a monastic calm where Mies’s curriculum was obsessively
pursued. Some saw the studio as a blank canvas accentuating the vibrancy
of human life within. Others understood its abstract qualities, and its
tendency to make its inhabitants self-police their behaviour, as rigid and
autocratic.

It’s seldom done in histories of modern architecture to note that the exposed
steelwork of Mies’s IIT buildings, paired with thin brickwork panels and
single-glazed windows, made the buildings perishingly cold in Chicago’s
freezing winters, and unbearably hot in summer. It’s also rare to mention
that, because steel and brickwork expand and contract at different rates,
many brick panels cracked, and flat roofs, hidden behind steel for visual
effect, regularly leaked. For Mies fans—like the admirers of other famous
modern architects—these were merely defensible consequences of genius.

Until recently, architectural histories also rarely acknowledged that the
blocks over which Mies laid his planning grid were no empty lot. They
were cleared as slums by the largely white city and Institute authorities in
the 1940s, having previously housed a notable middle-class black
community whose cultural life was expressed in a vibrant jazz scene. Some
have reinterpreted their demolition as racially motivated social cleansing.
Historian Tim Samuelson has illustrated how the Mecca Apartments, a
welcoming home for black immigrants to Chicago, immortalized in the
Mecca Flat Blues (1924), was cleared to make way for Crown Hall. An
alternative interpretation of Mies’s campus planning grid is thus possible
here—in conjunction with interpretations of Crown Hall as autocratic—not
just as a symbol of technical objectivity but also as a symbol of
authoritarian power.

Mies in the sky

Mies’s talent for making architectural images in steel was strikingly
demonstrated by his office’s high-rise buildings from the 1950s and 1960s.
These drew inspiration from an early project.

In 1921, Mies entered an architectural competition for a site on
Friedrichstrasse in Berlin with a design for a skyscraper. He made two
striking photomontages celebrating the literal transparency of all-glass
facades: one showing floor to ceiling glazing enigmatically reflecting the
sky in daylight; the other illustrating its see-through qualities when lit from
within at night. Although they didn’t win Mies the competition, these
images later became famous, anticipating the modern tower block.

The first steel towers built to the designs of Mies’s office were twin
apartment blocks overlooking Lake Michigan, turned at 90 degrees to each
other, connected with a slender low-level canopy, known as 860-880 Lake
Shore Drive. Internal ‘cores’ provided the buildings’ structural stability,
accommodating the elevators and vertical services. Individual flats, eight
per floor, were laid out around the cores, designed as open spaces, with
fitted furniture and sliding screens substituting for most walls and doors.

Structurally, a grid of primary steel columns was placed inside the outer
edges of the towers’ floors, encased in concrete for fireproofing.
Prefabricated secondary steel elements were then fixed to the facade,
expressed as vertical I-sections, four per structural bay. These steels
supported aluminium-framed windows and provided so-called lateral
bracing, reinforcing the building against wind loads. A small break in the
secondary steels at every floor level illustrated visually on the fagade that
these secondary steels weren’t continuous, and therefore weren’t primary
supports for the building. But, to the consternation of Mies fans, every fifth
I-section was fitted directly over a concrete-encased primary steel column.
These steels thus had no structural purpose, added instead to maintain the
rhythm of the fagade. For good modernists accustomed to Mies’s dictum
that ‘less is more’, and Sullivan’s ‘form ever follows function’, these steels
remained unnecessary. They were functionally redundant adornments,
serving only the visual image of the tower, and they became objects of
controversy among modern architects.

Just as Mies imagined the Minerals and Metals Building as a prototype for
campus architecture, Lake Shore Drive was envisaged as a prototype for
steel-framed towers. The formula was refined in a series of projects

accommodating diverse functions: further apartments on Commonwealth
Promenade in Chicago, 1956; courtrooms at the Dirksen Federal Building
in Chicago’s Loop, 1964; and offices for distillers Seagram in New York,
1958. The same elements recurred: ‘shell-and-core’ planning (an internal
core containing services and elevators, surrounded by floorplates), and
‘curtain’ facades characterized by I-section steels.

The Seagram building, designed with Philip Johnson, was a refined and
expensive variation on the theme (Figure 8). Liquor baron Samuel
Bronfman, the client, was egged on by his daughter, Phyllis Lambert, who
trained as an architect at IIT. Rather than stepping back from the street like
most New York skyscrapers, maximizing the building’s volume within strict
zoning laws, Seagram was a straightforward rectangular block. Facade I-
sections were special castings in bronze rather than stock steel sections.
Key interior surfaces were clad in marble and travertine. A band of artificial
lighting around the perimeter of each ceiling heightened the drama of the
building’s stacked floorplates when seen from below at night. Glazed
internal office partitions were designed to emphasize the open plan layout.
Venetian blinds were fitted with only three settings—open, closed, and half-
closed—to present an orderly image to the street. A modern art programme
commissioned murals, tapestries, and canvases from luminaries including
Pablo Picasso and Mark Rothko. And a plain granite plaza outside, lifted
three steps from the street, made a calm garden. Seagram became the
archetypal steel and glass tower. It became both typical and exceptional: a
refined building for a specific client on a specific site, and simultaneously a
universal symbol of corporate modernity, imitated worldwide.

8. Seagram Building, New York, USA, 1958. A ‘shell and core’ tower
with ‘curtain’ walls, characterized by I-section columns, providing
office space for a firm of distillers. It was a key building in its
architect’s sequence of architectural experiments to find the ideal form
for the modern tower. Both typical and exceptional, it is both a refined
building for a specific client on a specific site, and a universal symbol
of corporate modernity, imitated globally. (Architect: Ludwig Mies van
der Rohe.)

The details of Mies’s towers—like columns placed for visual effect as
cladding over structural ones, and decorative steel casings fitted around
structural columns—didn’t always express their structural logic directly.
But they did always illustrate its idea. Mies’s towers, like most modern
buildings were ‘representational’: they didn’t represent ideas about the past
like previous architectures had, but engaged instead in self-representation,
expressing—and sometimes subtly enhancing—the imagery of their own
constructional logic to evoke ideas about modernity.

Shaping modern culture in steel

In 1831, Victor Hugo had anticipated a modern architecture reflecting
scientific culture, arguing for special buildings, which people could identify
with as symbols of the age. Mies believed that his work fulfilled this
promise. Indeed, his fans likened the I-section steels of Lake Shore Drive to
the tracery of medieval Gothic cathedrals. ‘True architecture,’ Mies
claimed, ‘is always objective and is the expression of the inner structure of
our times, from which it comes’. He didn’t just think he was designing
individual buildings for individual sites and clients. He thought he was
isolating the universal forms of architecture itself, paring down the logic of
steel—and building types like campus buildings and high-rise towers—to
their essential images. Mies imagined himself not as inventing a style, but
as identifying the authentic, timeless architectural expression of the future.
Once the job of isolating these forms was done, Mies imagined he would
pass the images and techniques to others for repeating and refining. He
imagined he was designing bespoke prototypes for others to mass produce.
Indeed, he lavished attention on the first campus buildings and towers
designed in his office but—once he felt the archetypes were established—
left later versions to his associates.

Easily imagined as a kit of columns and beams, like the construction toy
Meccano, iron and steel nurtured ideas about a perfected modern
architecture. Philosopher Walter Benjamin noted in 1935 how the imagery
of iron architecture was derived ‘dialectically’ out of the conflict between
old symbolic codes developed for stone and wood, and new forms of

structural technology. Iron and steel frames encouraged the integration of
structure with services, and ideas of ‘space’ with industrial production,
assembling buildings from sophisticated engineered components to express
ideas about technological modernity. The emphasis on the rational
structural calculation of components shifted design attention from the whole
building to the part, just as scientific cultures shifted Western thinking from
traditional holistic religious views to a greater focus on the individual. Such
shifts were as latent in the Iron Bridge and Eiffel Tower as they were at
Crown Hall and Seagram. The job of the architect-genius, as Mies
‘modestly’ understood himself in later life, was to work through the cultural
and social consequences of new logics of production, to determine the true
architectural forms of modernity. For him, the material best suited to those
labours was steel.

Chapter 3
Reinforced concrete

Reinforced concrete and the sale of expertise

The reinforced concrete entrepreneur Francois Hennebique designed a four-
storey villa for his family in the Parisian suburb of Bourg-la-Reine in 1904
(Figure 9), demonstrating his firm’s talents with the material that made his
fortune. Architectural critics were snobbish about the house’s eccentricities,
but it remains an object of fascination because of Hennebique’s global
domination of reinforced concrete construction at the start of the 20th
century.

9. Villa Hennebique, Bourg-la-Reine, Paris, France, 1904. A show-off
house designed by an entrepreneur for his family, displaying novel uses
for reinforced concrete. It reflected Hennebique’s global domination of
reinforced concrete construction at the beginning of the 20th century.
(Designer: Francois Hennebique.)

Reinforced concrete lends itself to a structural form called the cantilever—
where a slab or bear is hung outwards from one side, suspended without
columns, counter-weighted by a mass of structure behind. The Hennebique
villa incorporated every kind of cantilever possible at that time. Its floors
stepped down to the rear as a series of terraces, covered with soil and
densely planted as ‘hanging gardens’, illustrating concrete’s substantial
load-bearing capacity. By contrast, the terrace balustrades showed how
delicate concrete elements could become. Looming above the house,
cantilevered out from it, was a sculptural concrete water tower, which
neighbours nicknamed ‘the minaret’. The villa’s external walls followed an
innovative construction method, where concrete was poured in situ between
3-centimetre-thick precast concrete slabs. These slabs provided permanent
formwork for structural concrete poured in behind, replacing the sacrificial
timber shuttering normally used to make temporary moulds for concrete
construction. They served to conceal the concrete poured on site, whose
finish could be unreliable, giving a more reliable precast finish, and were
hand tooled to reveal the flint aggregate used in the mix, so they looked like
stone from a distance.

Hennebique didn’t invent reinforced concrete but commercialized it
ingeniously. The ancient Romans had used concrete 2,000 years before,
working out how to make mortar by mixing kiln-dried lime with sand and
water, adding stone dust to produce a paste that set hard when it dried in the
air. They subsequently found that, by adding a natural compound of iron
oxide and silica alumina, mortar could harden in large quantities
independently of the air. We now call this cement. Large quantities of
cement poured around broken bricks and fragments of stone were employed
to make the first concrete walls in Rome in the 2nd century BCE (although
the name concrete, describing cement combined with masonry aggregate,
didn’t emerge until the 19th century). The most significant Roman
invention—when concrete started to find its own architectural logic—was
the vaulted concrete floor, an important invention for the Roman empire
because of its scarcity of timber. And the most spectacular survival of
Roman concrete is the soaring dome of the Pantheon in Rome, (probably)
completed in 125 cE.

Historically, concrete was strong in compression but poor in tension. It
proved itself as a material for walls, vaults, and domes—which carry loads
in compression—but not for beams and spans—reliant on tension. And
because the outcome of each concrete pour could be temperamental,
depending on the precise mix, the temperature and humidity when it was
poured, as well as the builder’s skill in achieving a reliable outcome,
concrete wasn’t widely used between Roman and Victorian times.

The structures required by 19th-century industries and infrastructures
revived interest in concrete, however. As skills in working the material
gradually improved, inventors tried combining it with iron. Iron was
stronger in tension but weaker in compression—the opposite properties to
concrete—and the combination of materials held promise. In 1854, a
plasterer called William Boutland Wilkinson from Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
UK, patented a method for inserting iron barrel hoops as tension rods at the
crown of concrete vaults. In 1875, William Henry Lascelles, a London
building contractor, filed a patent for strengthening concrete panels with
iron rods, and strengthening concrete floors with wire mesh. In 1877,
Thaddeus Hyatt, a New York manufacturer, published an account of fifteen
years’ experimentation with reinforced concrete, establishing that iron
reinforcement added to the bottom of a concrete beam would cope with
tension, while concrete at the top would handle compression, countering
what engineers call ‘bending moments’ to produce rigid structural elements.
He also established that iron covered with concrete would remain
undamaged in fire, promoting ‘ferro-concrete’ as a fireproof material.
Experiments and patents multiplied towards the end of the 19th century.

Hennebique’s own innovations weren’t extraordinary. He substituted steel
reinforcement for iron, and spaced steel straps closer together near the ends
of beams where structural loads were greater. It was his patents filed in
1892, however, that established his fortune. His genius lay in recognizing
the commercial opportunities those patents established. As soon as they
were signed, Hennebique sold his contracting concern and established a
reinforced concrete construction consultancy. It provided engineering
drafting services, licensing only reliable contractors to construct its designs.
And it guarded its intellectual property jealously, challenging infringements
with legal action. In 1892, the Hennebique firm employed two engineer-

draughtsmen in Paris, growing by 1894 to fifty-six engineers supplying
drawings to fifty-five licensed contractors, and by 1909 to sixty-two
drafting offices around the world. If a client wanted a steel-reinforced
concrete-framed building at the beginning of the 20th century, they had
little choice but to use a patented system, among which Hennebique’s was
most prominent. The firm’s magazine Le Beton Armé (Reinforced Concrete)
promoted its technical expertise and extended concrete’s aura of innovation.
Hennebique thus established the idea of the professional construction
consultancy, which was as important to the emergence of modern
architecture as any of the buildings discussed in this book.

Hennebique’s house thus indicated how reinforced concrete could
symbolize the new, prefiguring the emergence of a technically oriented
construction industry. It anticipated the higher status and value that
gradually became accorded to design skills over craft skills. It also
illustrates how entrepreneurial modern architects and engineers learnt they
could monetize intellectual property and professional expertise—be it
technical prowess or visual innovation—as much as designing buildings.

Ethics of production and living

Beginning as a gloopy liquid but setting hard, reinforced concrete is a
troublesome commodity. In philosophy, ‘concrete’ refers to something
immediately present. However, as Adrian Forty has shown, many thinkers
have struggled with the contradictory qualities of this demanding material.
Famous for making dramatic forms, concrete has no form of its own,
merely shaped by the formwork into which it is poured. Seemingly
substantial, cement only becomes strong when combined with aggregate
and steel. While the ingredients of concrete are natural, it grew to
symbolize the human-made world. And, while it’s been imagined as
timeless, concrete frequently came to represent the new because of its
difference from other materials. It was attributed a moral rightness because
its finished surfaces bear ‘honest’ traces of how they were worked. Less
legible than steel’s kit of parts, however, concrete became a curious
architectural symbol of technological modernity.

American architect Albert Kahn matched Francois Hennebique for
commercial nous, remarking that ‘architecture is 90% business and 10%
art’. His office, mixing architects and engineers, designed no-nonsense
buildings for industry, developing early expertise in reinforced concrete.
Concrete stood for an ethic of production in the early factories his
organization designed.

In 1909, Kahn’s office designed the Automobile Assembly Building for
motorcar pioneer Henry Ford’s Highland Park plant in Detroit, Michigan
(Figure 10). It was laid out around the production line for Ford’s ‘Model T’;
the vehicle, produced between 1908 and 1927, which opened up motoring
to ordinary Americans. Early cars were made using traditional
coachbuilding techniques, where the vehicle stayed in one place, worked on
by a sequence of skilled trades. Ford instead refined a method of keeping
trades and machines static while cars moved between them, calculating
assembly processes around the space needed for each task and the time
taken to execute it—which became elevated into the so-called Fordist
theory of industrial production. Ford’s thinking promoted the methodical
process of goods through a workshop and the consignment of tasks to
individual workers, rather than relying on their initiative, promoting the
rational analysis of processes to identify efficiencies.

10. Automobile Assembly Building, Highland Park, Detroit, USA,
1909. A reinforced concrete-framed factory laid out around the
production line for Henry Ford’s famous ‘Model T’ car. It illustrated
Ford’s capitalism: his theories about the methodical process of goods
through a workshop, the consignment of tasks to individual workers,
and the technical analysis of processes to identify efficiencies.
(Architect; Albert Kahn.)

Kahn and Ford shared ideas, becoming friends, and the Highland Park
factory can be understood as a built diagram of their thinking together. It
comprised a four-storey concrete frame, relatively long and thin, with
decoration limited to an ornamented cornice. Internally, there were no
dividing walls. Vertical circulation and staff changing spaces were pushed
outside the primary volume, as towers, to maximize continuous space for
machinery. The concrete frame was infilled externally with floor to ceiling
glazing, maximizing light. Gravity was used to shift parts from upper floors
to the main production line at ground level, and cars moved along this

production line with components dropped onto them from above. Car
bodies, for example, complete with doors and seats, were slid down chutes
for fitting to their chassis. If the processes on each floor were properly
coordinated, Ford believed, lazy working would become immediately
apparent. Architecturally, Highland Park was transitional, with origins in
18th-century European mill buildings that had separate workshops on
multiple floors. And Kahn’s later factories for Ford—like the River Rouge
plant in Detroit—became even clearer diagrams of industrial processes,
concentrating production into a single line on a single floor.

Concrete came to stand for Fordist industrial production in Detroit,
representing capitalist free enterprise, the efficiency of centralized industry,
dedication to work, and self-sacrifice. However, it could also stand for
socialist collective living. Twenty years after Highland Park, in 1929, the
Narkomfin Communal House was completed in Moscow to designs by
architects Moisei Ginzburg and [gnatii Milinis (Figure 11). The Russian
Revolution of 1917 had overturned the autocratic regime of the Tsar and—
inspired by communist ideas of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels—ousted
the so-called bourgeois class of aristocrats and managers in favour of
worker’s councils called Soviets. By the time that the Narkomfin was
constructed, there was a drive to industrialize the Soviet economy,
paralleled by a cultural revolution seeking to restructure social life along
Marxist lines.

11, Narkomfin Communal House, Moscow, Russia, 1929. A radical
experiment in communist social engineering: a ‘social condenser’
housing bureaucrats of the Ministry of Finance, including twenty-four
collectivized flats whose residents ate, relaxed, and socialized together,
imagined as sharing ideals and daily practicalities. (Architects: Moisei
Ginzburg and Ignatii Milinis.)

Commissioned as a prototype, the Narkomfin was a radical exercise in
social engineering. Designed for bureaucrats of the Ministry of Finance, it
replaced two bourgeois villas on Moscow’s Garden Ring Road. Dressed in
modern architecture’s Gropius-inspired ‘teenage uniform’, it boasted white
painted concrete walls with flat roofs and ribbon windows, seemingly
hovering above the ground on columns. It was most striking for its radical
organization. Devised by a state research agency headed by Ginzburg, it
maximized shared facilities, like those for cooking and dining, adding a
library, gymnasium, and laundry, plus a créche with professional childcare

so women could play a fuller role in society. The flats were grouped into a
single slab, connected with a bridge to another block containing most of the
communal spaces, while a laundry and créche stood as separate buildings in
the garden. The aim was to socialize private aspects of domestic life into
the public sphere.

Different flat types were included. Two so-called ‘transitional’ flats weren’t
dependent on communal facilities. However, twenty-four ‘collectivized’
units were provided for individuals or couples: compact double-height
volumes, accommodating only sleeping, showers, and toilets. These had no
kitchens, and living space was minimal, because residents were expected to
spend most of their home lives as part of the collective—eating, relaxing,
and exercising together—sharing ideals and daily practicalities.

The Narkomfin was never the fully communal society its champions
envisaged because of the multiple flat types. Indeed, a rooftop penthouse
was added at a late stage for the minister of finance, separate from the
collective, and Ginzburg added an enlarged version of the ‘transitional’ unit
for himself. Moreover, the prototype was barely repeated because Soviet
communism changed around it. The Narkomfin was celebrated in 1928, but
Stalinist authorities declared by 1930 that workers preferred conventional
domestic arrangements, and Ginzburg was required to disown the building
as an elitist experiment.

Together, the Narkomfin and Highland Park show how concrete structures
came to stand for radically opposing ideas of communism and high
capitalism in the 20th century. They indicate how concrete—at once liquid
and solid, formless and formed, natural and human-made—became
associated with divergent attempts to rethink social order and mechanized
production. They illustrate how the material was not only contradictory in
itself, but also had divergent ideas about modernity projected onto it.

Inventing Le Corbusier

The second superhero of modern architecture I’1l introduce was an intense
French-speaking Swiss man, Charles-Edouard Jeanneret (1887-1965), who

wrestled with reinforced concrete as a way of wrestling with what
architecture could do. He moved to Paris in 1917, after art school, and after
designing a series of almost-modem houses in his hometown of La Chaux-
de-Fonds. He painted together with the artist Amédée Ozenfant (whose
family knew the Hennebiques) and they labelled themselves ‘purists’,
publishing an art manifesto together, After Cubism, 1918, demanding a
reclamation of order after the fragmentation of Cubism. They depicted
everyday objects in flattened compositions, borrowing projection
techniques from engineering drawing. Jeanneret reinvented his architecture
and himself, becoming ‘Le Corbusier’—combining a historic family
surname, Le Corbesier, with the French word for raven, corbeau, a haughty
bird he thought he looked like—believing that, by doing so, he was
identifying himself with the deep origins of human civilization.

Flora Samuel has observed that concrete was, for Corbusier, a natural
material, and he imagined being under concrete as being cocooned within
the earth. He was as contradictory as the material itself. He took himself
very seriously but was mercilessly self-mocking. He celebrated the
straightforwardness of technology and the ‘engineer’s aesthetic’, but
designed with a painter’s instinct for form, colour, and proportion. He
rejected symmetry but employed it selectively. He praised the machine age
while believing—as William Curtis put it—in ‘an equilibrium between the
mechanized and the rustic, the secular and the sacred [and] the local and the
universal’. His thinking blended practicality with a yearning for primeval
mysticism. He identified modernity as the source of The New Spirit (the
name of a magazine he co-published with Ozenfant in the 1920s), seeking
inspiration from history, understanding pure geometries—the cylinder,
pyramid, cube, block, and sphere—as the true inheritance of the classical
past, claiming architecture to be ‘the magnificent, knowledgeable and
correct play of volumes under light’. Corbusier employed a substantial
studio but was quick to claim his own genius, believing himself—in the
terms of Friedrich Nietzsche, the philosopher of destiny—one of a select
group of ‘world historical individuals’. When devotees copied his
architecture, he reinvented it. Condemned as a villain for his ideas on urban
planning, Corbusier nevertheless remains a hero for his buildings, which
significantly extended architecture’s organizational and expressive
potential.

The late 1910s and 1920s saw major technological and cultural
achievements in Europe and America. These followed a rush for technical
advantage during the First World War, and responded to its horrors.
Movements in modern art were matched by modern novelists ‘making it
new’ like Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, and Marcel Proust. Meanwhile,
cultural theorists like Walter Benjamin and Siegfried Kracauer tried to
account for the experiences of modern life, especially the alienation they
believed it produced. Increasing dissemination of still photography
paralleled a cinema boom which made moving, and then talking, pictures
widespread. Radio and gramophones brought news and entertainment into
prosperous homes. Glamorous ocean liners made international shipping
faster and more luxurious. Motor cars were an increasingly regular sight.
Air travel became possible for the rich, and daring pioneer aviators became
newsworthy. Medical innovations like penicillin and insulin seemed poised
to transform public health, which became a prominent preoccupation. And
the emergence of jazz and swing was matched with waltz, polka, and
twostep. As the 1920s drew to a close, a recognizable cultural and
technological ‘avant garde’ was emerging, and it started forming public
opinion.

A house begun in 1928 and finished in 1931—Villa Savoye, at Poissy,
outside Paris—is sometimes portrayed as the definitive architectural
reflection of the jazz age. The architecture of planes lent itself more
logically to reinforced concrete than steel for Corbusier, and Villa Savoye
fulfilled a series of his early experiments. Corbusier’s planar compositions
related to, but differed from, Wright’s and Rietveld’s, in which walls and
furniture elements ‘pinwheeled’ outwards from a centre, being contained
instead within boxes. Villa Savoye extended ideas that were first explored
in an unbuilt house project—Maison Citrohan, 1922, intended for mass
production like France’s Citréen car, famously promoted as a ‘machine for
living’—which were then tested in a sequence of houses around Paris, co-
designed with Corbusier’s cousin Pierre Jeanneret, including: Maison La
Roche-Jeanneret, 1924; Maison Cook, 1926; and Villa Stein-de-Monzie,
1928. Villa Savoye was never a good house to live in, frequently cold and
damp, and it became a ruin after the Savoye family were deported by the
Nazis in the Second World War. But its image proved long-lasting enough
that the French government eventually restored it as a cultural treasure.

Villa Savoye was constructed in concrete frame infilled with blockwork and
tile, rendered-over and painted white to give the impression of continuous
concrete planes (Figure 12). Perched on a ridge in a rolling landscape, it’s
almost square in plan. First-floor living spaces apparently float above the
ground on a column grid. Recessed beneath, painted dark green to
emphasize the floating illusion, the ground floor is shaped around the
tuming circle of a car—that definitive mass-produced symbol of modern
life. The column grid is almost, but not quite, regular, with a few columns
artfully shifted off-grid. The grid thus establishes the house’s rational
credentials, while its rogue columns simultaneously highlight its artfulness.

12. Villa Savoye, Poissy, France, 1931. It was a built in a concrete
frame infilled with blockwork and tile, rendered-over and painted
white to give the impression of continuous concrete planes. Its first-
floor living spaces apparently float above a recessed ground floor
shaped around the turning circle of a car—that mass-produced symbol
of modern life. Arguably the definitive image of the modern house, it
has been much interpreted. (Architects: Le Corbusier and Pierre
Jeanneret.)

After being deposited by their chauffeur, the Savoyes entered the lobby,
enclosed floor to ceiling with industrial glazing, as reminiscent of a factory
as of a house. A washbasin was placed here symbolically. It had multiple
meanings, standing for: the modern preoccupation with health and hygiene;
the holy water stoop placed at the door of Catholic churches; and the urinal
that artist René Duchamp displayed controversially in an art gallery in
1917, entitled ‘Fountain’, and claimed as a ‘readymade’ ‘object-type’ as
culturally significant as any artwork. From here, the Savoyes ascended a

steep ramp cut through the centre of the house to reach the first floor. This
storey appeared solid from the outside—characterized by a horizontal strip
of windows running around all four elevations—but it was partly hollowed
out to provide an open sundeck accessed from the living spaces and
bedrooms. The appearance of solidity was maintained because the facades,
and their window strips, sailed across the front of the deck. The house’s
living spaces were strikingly light-filled in comparison to conventional
masonry buildings. Finishes blended industrial and domestic imagery,
evoking the decks of ocean liners and train interiors. The bathroom
associated with the master bedroom was expressed as a shrine to cleanliness
and ‘primitiveness’, centred on a sinuous recliner for naked relaxation.

The second flight of the ramp led to a roof terrace with a highly modelled
enclosing wall. Notionally a windbreak, this curved plane served a
primarily sculptural purpose when seen from outside, as a cylinder placed
artfully above the rectangle of the first floor.

There are as many interpretations of Villa Savoye as there are numerous
academic texts about it. It’s been seen as a fulfilment of two formulas for
modern architecture promoted by Corbusier in the 1920s. The first was the
cinematic idea of ‘architectural promenade’—extending Schmarsow’s
theories, and discussed in Corbusier’s 1923 book Towards a New
Architecture—claiming that space is primarily appreciated by moving
around it. In this context, Villa Savoye’s ramp can be understood as a
promenade device, unfolding the house’s sequence of rooms. The second
formula it exemplified was Corbusier’s ‘five points for a new architecture’,
published in The New Spirit in 1926, attempting a scientific categorization
of modern architecture’s ‘teenage uniform’ into key elements:

1. The replacement of loadbearing masonry walls with a grid of reinforced concrete columns,
called piloti;

2. The free plan, imagining walls as planes in space liberated from their structural function by
interior columns;

3. The free facade, recognizing that structural columns liberate elevations from bearing loads;

4. The horizontal window, made possible because non-loadbearing elevations allow openings to be
placed differently, supposedly lighting rooms evenly, and;

5. Roof gardens, compensating for the green space that a building consumes by replacing it on top
as a flat roof.

Villa Savoye exemplified these points. Perched on piloti, with its roof
garden highlighted by the sculptural windbreak, its columns were
conspicuously detached from the walls, illustrating the ‘free plan’. And the
horizontal window strips emphasized how the walls above didn’t transfer
their loads to the ground but instead to the columns behind. Although
Corbusier later moved away from these ‘five points’, architecture students
love a formula, and they’ve remained doggedly persistent.

Villa Savoye has also been read as a ship, a machine, an Arcadian
landscape, a macho fantasy, and a bourgeois villa in socialist clothing.
Others have seen it as a reinvention of a Greek temple: sat on a hilltop, with
its facade divided—tike temple fronts—into three parts, with elevations
judiciously proportioned (according to a system Corbusier devised called
‘regulating lines’). Like the ritual route to a temple’s sanctuary, climbing
Villa Savoye’s ramp has been seen as symbolizing an ascent to the gods.
The critic Sigfried Giedion emphasized that the house coincided with the
increasing acceptance of Albert Einstein’s theories of relativity—published
in 1905 and 1916—reimagining space and time as a single interdependent
continuum. Giedion linked architectural promenade—imagining buildings
as experiences unfolded in space and time—to relativity, as an illustration
of the idea of time being inseparable from space. Later historians, interested
in theories of the body, emphasized instead the cleanliness demanded by the
house, and its fixation with the naked figure.

Commentaries on Villa Savoye were conducted in building as well as
writing. Although Irish designer Eileen Gray’s house E.1027 was finished
before Villa Savoye, in 1929, she knew it from prepublished drawings.
E.1027 was an alphabetic code combining Gray’s name with that of her
collaborator Jean Badovici, editor of the magazine Living Architecture.
Built for their use together, perched above the sea at Roquebrune-Cap-
Martin near Monaco, the house initially subscribes to the ‘five points’
(Figure 13). It was lifted on piloti with ribbon windows, a roof garden, and
internal walls expressed as planes detached from structural concrete
columns. But Gray challenged Corbusier’s work: the image of hygiene ‘to
bore you to death’, and the ‘poverty’ of modern architecture stemming
‘from the atrophy of sensuality’. E.1027 was intimately tuned to its
inhabitants, its bespoke furniture choreographing daily life. Materials were

chosen to enhance how the building was touched. Cupboards were tailored
around their contents, selectively hidden or revealed. Light fittings and
radiators were integrated thoughtfully. Gray designed a gramophone trolley
that could be wheeled outside, another with a cork surface to stop tea cups
rattling, plus special chairs—some soft, some hard—for particular purposes.
Light and shadow were thoughtfully composed, and windows were located
to frame views when inhabitants stood or sat in certain places. Combining
elements from Villa Savoye and the Schréder House, E.1027 was more
mature than both: a striking image of architectural function fitted intimately
to the micro-rituals of daily life. The historian Beatriz Colomina has
suggested that Corbusier visited and was jealous, struggling to accept that a
woman designed such an accomplished modern house. Staying there in
1938, after Gray moved out, he exacted weird psychological revenge,
Colomina argued, daubing eight murals depicting sexualized female figures
which changed E.1027’s character by dematerializing certain planes
visually: an act understood as vandalism.

13. E.1027, Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France, 1929. Combining
elements from Villa Savoye and the Schréder House, this villa was
more mature than both: a striking image of architectural function
fitted intimately to the micro-rituals of daily life. Light and shadow
were thoughtfully composed, with windows located to frame views
when inhabitants stood or sat in certain places. (Architect: Eileen
Gray.)

Other critiques of Villa Savoye included, in the 1980s, a series of houses
obsessively designed by architect Peter Eisenman around variations of grid
and promenade. In 2001, the Australian practice ARM collaged a distorted
black replica of the Villa Savoye into the Institute of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Studies in Canberra, to make a point about Western
colonists’ emasculation of indigenous traditions.

Some historians portrayed the planar white houses of early modern
architecture as stark and banal: as crude functionalism. But the artistry of

Villa Savoye and E.1027 illustrate how this argument is simplistic. Their
imagery drew from supposedly everyday functional artefacts: aeroplanes,
boats, trains, cars, and factories. But they also simultaneously manipulated
and heightened those images, appreciating their significance as talismans of
the age, reinventing them in architecture to advocate that high culture
should embrace global modernity.

The International Style

By the 1930s, enough buildings had been built with enough in common for
critics to claim a distinctive modern architecture. Two influential books set
out genealogies, or studies in family resemblance.

The International Style, published in 1932, catalogued an exhibition at New
York’s Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), presenting photographs and plans
of buildings that more or less complied with Corbusier’s ‘five points’. His
work was shown alongside that of Mies and Gropius, their reputations only
emerging at that time. Other buildings given comparable emphasis were
designed by architects who became less effective self-publicists and have
been largely forgotten including: Uno Ahren, Ludwig Kysela, J.J.P Oud,
Lily Reich (the only woman), Nicolaiev & Fissenko, and Manora Yamada.
The show emerged from European road trips taken by MoMA’s director
Alfred Barr with critic Henry-Russell Hitchcock and a history graduate,
Philip Johnson (who later retrained as an architect and collaborated with
Mies on the Seagram offices).

Barr, Hitchcock, and Johnson argued that the buildings they depicted shared
an aesthetic resemblance. They presented them as progenitors of a
distinctive architectural style. Style in architecture was effectively a 19th-
century idea, popularized by German writer Alois Riegel. It described a
predominantly visual approach to buildings where certain shapes and forms
characterize the architectures of particular historical epochs—no matter that
individual buildings get produced in different places at different times by
different people under different social, cultural, and political conditions.
‘Classical’, ‘Baroque’, ‘Gothic’, and ‘Gothic Revival’ styles have been
defined, for example, spanning extensive time periods and geographies.

Styles are thus ideas projected back onto architectures of the past by
historians. The International Style claimed modern architecture as a style
like other styles, characterizing it as functional, following three principles:

[an] emphasis on volume—space enclosed by thin planes or surfaces as opposed to the
suggestion of mass and solidity; regularity as opposed to symmetry or other kinds of obvious
balance; and, lastly, dependence on the intrinsic elegance of materials, technical perfection
and fine proportions, as opposed to applied ornament.

The idea that modern architecture could be depicted as a style was disputed
by establishment architects of the time, who subscribed to older styles,
offended by what they saw as modernism’s blunt crudeness. Modern
architects, on the other hand, disliked the show’s emphasis on aesthetics
over function, thinking it over-simplified their work, believing instead that
their designs demonstrated timeless technical and social principles. Indeed,
they suspected that characterizing modern architecture as a style sowed the
seeds of its destruction, making it transitory, opening up space for
something else to follow.

Art historian Nikolaus Pevsner arrived in Britain from Germany shortly
after MoMA’s show, sacked from Gottingen University by the Nazis for his
Jewishness. He brought enthusiasm for modernism—which he understood
as the true architectural expression of the age—and a desire to promote it to
a sceptical British public, reflected in his book The Pioneers of Modern
Architecture: From William Morris to Walter Gropius, 1936. Pevsner’s
story located the origins of modernism in the art theories of William Morris
and John Ruskin—who examined how mechanized industry was changing
society, and argued that art and architecture should change in response.
Pevsner identified provisional responses to this problem in the flowing,
naturally inspired shapes of Art Nouveau and the so-called Arts and Crafts
movement led by Morris—which sought to return to the handmade crafts of
preindustrial architecture—and also in 19th-century engineering structures
like railway sheds. But these were only transitional responses to
industrialization, Pevsner argued, either rejecting modemity’s consequences
or failing to understand the full implications of industrial production. Only
in the work of Gropius and the Bauhaus, he argued—in buildings like those
collected in The International Style—had the proper architectural

expression of modernity been achieved. Although they didn’t get on, Barr,
Hitchcock, and Johnson saw how Pevsner was reinforcing modern
architecture by equipping it with a history and, in 1942, MoMA republished
an expanded edition of his book retitled The Pioneers of Modern Design.

These influential texts gave modern architecture momentum in the 1930s
and 1940s. But they also over-simplified it. They admitted modernism into
the realm of high culture, but only through a 19th-century, premodern idea
of architectural history as a sequence of visual styles. Nevertheless, the
arguments of these books became so pervasive that they continue to shape
how modern architecture remains understood.

Cities of tomorrow

Modernity transformed Western cities through industrialization in the 19th
and early 20th centuries. Populations shifted from agricultural labour to
industrial production, from dispersal on the land to concentrations around
new work in offices and factories. Established cities grew substantially, and
more were built. Much of this growth was unplanned and opportunistic,
driven by market forces and short-term necessities. Early industrial cities
were frequently characterized by cramped living conditions, polluted air
and water, little sanitation, bad health and hygiene, poor sunlight, and a lack
of green space. Infrastructures were often provided only in retrospect—
railways, for example, retrofitted to shift goods and commuters, or paved
roads to accommodate motor traffic—choking urban life and public space.
City ‘slums’ became widely condemned, often by well-to-do philanthropists
who associated bad conditions with moral depravity among the poor.
Improvements were demanded, and the gradual provision of sewers, water,
gas, and electricity infrastructures transformed city life. But their
installation was often piecemeal and disruptive, highlighting a lack of
organized planning for urban growth.

Around the turn of the 20th century, various ideal city layouts were
proposed, speculating about how cities could be planned for the machine
age, how urban space might be different if organized properly around the
new infrastructures. They coincided with the emergence of town planning

as a profession, out of a long tradition of planned cities, spanning from the
symbolic grid of historic Beijing, and the axes of Ancient Rome, to the
crescents and circuses of Georgian Bath; from the boulevards cut through
19th-century Paris by Baron Haussmann to the gridirons of Manhattan and
Chicago.

British inventor Ebeneezer Howard published a proposal for ‘Garden Cities
of To-morrow’ in 1898, inspired by ideas about social reform and the
authenticity of nature. He envisaged circular-plan ‘slumless, smokeless’
towns of 32,000 people dispersed across an agricultural landscape,
supposedly combining the best of town and country. Industry, retail, and
residential areas would be separated into concentric zones to promote
public health. No Garden Cities were built following Howard’s formula, but
some ‘garden villages’ and ‘garden suburbs’ were constructed in the 1910s,
comprising picturesque cottages with gardens, designed by Arts and Crafts
architects. Their romantic imagery was later exploited by property
developers in the 1920s and ’30s who mass produced cheap copies as
suburban sprawl. Howard’s Garden City prompted Frank Lloyd Wright’s
speculative Broadacre City proposal for the USA, 1932: a car-oriented, low-
density vision giving each family an acre of land for a house and
smallholding, revisited during the Cold War for its potential to disperse the
American population against the threat of nuclear attack.

Notoriously, Corbusier’s studio also produced a sequence of speculative
ideal city designs. His (unbuilt) Ville Contemporaine, or Contemporary
City, 1922, fused the philanthropic ambitions of the Garden City with the
formal axes of Haussman’s Paris and the grids of Manhattan and Chicago.
Ville Contemporaine proposed a new form of community. Its key functions
were to be concentrated into cruciform towers built from mass-produced
parts. A grid of highways would enclose these towers, freeing up land in
between for parks, celebrating the health-giving potential of sunlight and
fresh air in contrast to 19th-century density and pollution, echoing Ruskin’s
ideas about the moral importance of nature. Traffic was to be separated
from pedestrians, with urban motorways divided from pedestrian routes
through green space. The centre of Ville Contemporaine would comprise a
seven-level road-rail interchange topped with an airport. Its innovations
were vertical rather than horizontal, its section orchestrated from skyscraper

to surface to subway train, experienced by elevator, escalator, windscreen,
and aeroplane window.

Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret collaged Ville Contemporaine into Paris,
crudely, in their ‘Plan Voisin’ (also unbuilt), 1925, a proposal to replace
certain so-called ‘insalubrious’ districts (Figure 14). Presented in striking
drawings and models—sponsored by Avions Voisin, makers of luxury cars,
and intended to capture politicians’ and industrialists’ imaginations—the
proposal was exhibited at Paris’s Exhibition of Decorative Arts in a mock-
up of a ‘dwelling type’ from one of the city blocks. It indicated once again a
grid of mass-produced towers which, in an apparent act of social cleansing,
were reserved for a ‘white-collar’ bureaucratic and cultural elite, with
labourers and factories nowhere to be seen. Developing Ville
Contemporaine, Plan Voisin proposed a rational, scientific, secular city
whose centralized planning would tame uncontrolled market-led spraw]—
promoting values often associated with socialism and communism. But
Corbusier and Jeanneret saw no contradiction in claiming the project’s
urban form and factory-made housing blocks instead as symbols of the new
capitalist order of Fordist mass production.

Pn re a ,
14. Plan Voisin, unbuilt project, 1925. A vision of the ideal city, applied
to so-called ‘insalubrious’ districts of Paris. Housing was concentrated
into towers to free up land in between for parks, celebrating the
health-giving potential of sunlight and fresh air, in contrast to 19th-
century density and pollution. A grid of highways sought to plan in
modern infrastructures, rather than retrofit them piecemeal.
(Architect: Le Corbusier.)

Ten years later, in 1935, Corbusier updated his urban ideas in the book
Radiant City. In 1928, he had co-founded a group called the International
Congress of Modern Architecture (CIAM: Congrés Internationaux

d’ Architecture Moderne), which included Gropius, Meyer, Mies, and
Rietveld. The group held its fourth meeting on a liner cruising from
Marseilles to Athens, where they agreed principles for ‘the functional city’.
Corbusier wrote up these principles as the so-called ‘Athens Charter’ to suit
his own ends. It repeated familiar tropes: densifying accommodation into

slabs around green space; liberating the ground from traffic for parkland;
and separating out uses (like housing from industry and transport). In
Radiant City, however, Corbusier added an extendable grid plan, organizing
the city’s functions according to the metaphor of a human body. The
business and administrative centre would be placed at the top of the plan as
the ‘head’ of Radiant City. Residential areas below would form the ‘lungs’,
set out in grid squares separated by major highways, with housing blocks
enclosing giant courtyards and gardens. The cultural centre comprised the
‘heart’, beneath which was heavy industry, the ‘feet’. This time, everyone—
workers and managers—shared similar housing as part of an egalitarian
technocratic society supposedly balancing urban and rural, work and family,
capitalism and centralized planning.

The closest that Radiant City came to realization was at the new city of
Chandigarh in India. When India and Pakistan were partitioned after
independence in 1947, so was the state of Punjab. Its capital, Lahore, was
allocated to Pakistan, and Indian Punjab decided to build a new capital.
Corbusier was appointed masterplanner after the original American
architect died in 1951, and his designs for Chandigarh followed Radiant
City principles. Its Parliament, High Court, and Secretariat buildings (also
designed by Corbusier) are at the head, with various grid-plan ‘sectors’
below containing housing, culture, commerce, and industry, separated by
highways. It may have been counter-intuitive at that time to design a car-
oriented city for a population then with few cars, and to appoint a Western
architect for a postcolonial capital, but Chandigarh has now become a
highly liveable city.

The ideals of Ville Contemporaine—planning cities around infrastructure
with access for all to hygiene and green space; concentrating urban life into
dense blocks; separating uses, and separating pedestrians from traffic; plus
the underlying conceit that an ideal city could be planned at all—remained
largely polemical in the early 20th century. Garden City, Radiant City, and
their counterparts were provocations: against slums, unplanned spraw],
deprivation, and insanitary conditions; for the potential of modern
technology, and planned infrastructure, to alleviate urban problems. In
postwar times, however, after the extensive destruction of European, Soviet,
and Asian cities, Corbusier’s provocations started to look plausibly

buildable, inspiring numerous postwar reconstructions. Corbusier never
took Plan Voisin as seriously in 1925 as certain Western and Soviet planners
did after 1945. Some of them actually did collage likenesses of Ville
Contemporaine into the remains of historic cities. And they frequently did it
too quickly and cheaply. The results were widely vilified. Indeed, disorder,
density, and the restriction of planning—condemned in the early 20th
century—became reappraised in the early 21st as symbolizing urban
spontaneity, vigour, and human freedom.

Brutal images

The significant artistic and cultural outpouring following the First World
War was decisive in the emergence of modern architecture, including the
early projects of Gray, Rietveld, Mies, and Corbusier. But the aftermath of
the Second World War was different. Widespread destruction—and stark
memories of genocide—meant that the project of rebuilding seemed more
raw in 1945 than it had in 1918. In places most affected, there was less
desire to rethink, more an impetus simply to put life back together and forge
a new normal. In urban design, this involved reaching for interwar
templates that held promise. These included the idea of town planning and,
sometimes, the formula of Ville Contemporaine. It also involved the
widespread adoption of modern architecture. The rise of conflict—
particularly the rise of fascism—emerged, at least partly, out of ordinary
people’s disaffection with elites. Authorities wanted to highlight that the
postwar world could be different, that renewed communities could be built
out of the ashes. And prewar experiments in modern architecture were
already there, ripe for reconstruction, as readymade symbols of the new.
Reinforced concrete—open to resculpting, always ambiguous enough to
have new meanings projected onto it—became an important medium for
refreshed architectural experiment.

Corbusier’s architecture caught the imagination of critics once more in the
postwar years, despite his ambiguous wartime record (which involved
collaborating with the Nazi-sympathizing regime of Vichy France and also
being rejected by it). The reinvention of both his work and modern
architecture became symbolized by his studio’s so-called Unité

d’ Habitation in Marseille—an untranslatable name, something like Unitary

Living Block—commissioned as a government prototype in late 1945 and
inaugurated in 1952 (Figure 15).

Eta

15, Unité d’Habitation, Marseilles, France, 1952. A neighbourhood for
1,600 people in one sixteen-storey slab, with flats slotted together in an
ingenious interlocking section, and a glazed ‘street’ on the seventh-
floor hosting community shops. Living spaces opened onto balconies
which doubled as shading devices. A rooftop school addressed a
recreation deck containing a pool and exercise facilities. The rough
concrete—named ‘béton brut’—became an inspiration for so-called
‘brutalism’, (Architect: Le Corbusier.)

The Marseille Unité was imagined as a fragment of Radiant City: a
neighbourhood for 1,600 people in one sixteen-storey slab. It largely
contained flats, which were slotted together in an ingenious interlocking
section. One floor of each flat ran the full width of the building, permitting
cross-ventilation in summer, with an additional half-floor opening-up a
double-height living space. Internal corridors on every third level provided
access, supervised by kitchen windows, with parcel lockers for each flat and
hatches for delivering communally manufactured ice (preceding the
widespread use of fridges). The flats’ living spaces opened onto balconies
that doubled as shading devices, named brises soleil. Corbusier’s
collaborator Charlotte Perriand detailed bespoke fittings including kitchen
units and polished timber handles. A glazed ‘street’ on the seventh floor
hosted community shops, including a convenience store, newsagent, and
hairdresser. A rooftop school opened onto a recreation deck containing a
pool and exercise facilities. A concierge supervised the entrance, and lift
attendants were proposed.

While Corbusier primarily imagined the Unité as an idea about community,
architectural critics focused instead on its appearance, shocked by its rough
concrete finishes. No attempt was made to hide the grain traced by
individual boards of the concrete formwork, to reduce the number of so-
called ‘blow holes’ pockmarking the surface, to polish-out marks where wet
concrete slopped around the top of each ‘lift’ of formwork, or to repair
imperfections. Corbusier argued these decisions were economic—
disingenuously, given that he was allowed to exceed standard state budgets
—and reflected human characteristics:

The defects shout at one from all parts of the structure! Luckily, we have no money! ...
Exposed concrete shows ... incidents of the shuttering, the joints of the planks, the fibres and
knots of the wood. [In] men and women do you not see the wrinkles and birthmarks, the
crooked noses ... ?

The commission was a sop to Corbusier when the French government was
awarding big projects, including the rebuilding of war-damaged towns like
St Dié and Le Havre, to other architects, The latter went to Auguste Perret,
for whom Corbusier had worked in the 1920s and who sought to refine
concrete surfaces as ‘poured stone’ in the tradition of Hennebique. The

Unité rejected Perret’s perfectionist values, and Corbusier instead revelled
deliberately in crude, gloopy concrete—named béton brut in French—
claiming he was elevating economic necessity into a symbol of the age.

Critics were also exercised by the Marseille Unité’s sculptural imagery.
Gone were the delicate piloti of modernism’s early ‘uniform’, pumped up
instead as massive splayed legs. Gone were the sheer white planes with thin
sills and drips, flattening elevations in an illusion of machine production,
replaced with deep brises soleil in primary colours. Gone was the curved
plane of Villa Savoye’s sundeck, superseded by a roofscape of enigmatic
concrete objects: funnels, a shell vault, blocks, and steps. The Unité
illustrated a renewed concern for form, texture, and colour, echoing the
swelling shapes of Corbusier’s latest artworks inspired by full-bodied naked
figures, and the so-called ‘primitive’ art of folk cultures. Architects who
subscribed to the ‘teenage uniform’ became troubled by what they saw as
the Unité’s gratuitous ‘formalism’, and the ambiguity of its shapes.

Those shapes pursued what we would now call ‘intertextuality’. They
played games with visual clues, hinting at forms—artistic, natural, and
industrial—which themselves hinted at other forms. The Unité’s imagery
shared visual sources with interwar modernism, like factories, trains, and
boats. But there was also another layer of subtler, stranger visual codes at
work which were altogether harder to place. These included echoes of
prehistoric sculptures and paintings—imagined as being timeless and before
style, and associated with classlessness—acknowledging the war’s
disruption of traditional hierarchies and cultural codes. They also included
references to wartime concrete bunkers and bomb shelters, and to Picasso’s
painting and sculpture (the artist spent a day with Corbusier discussing the
Marseille drawings). The Unité illustrated the idea that altered images of
modernity seemed necessary to express a revised postwar understanding of
society and technology. Following mechanized warfare, incendiary bombs
—and especially the Nazi Holocaust and atomic bombs dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 1945—technology no longer seemed such an
innocent emblem of progress. Numerous modern architects with little
opportunity to build in wartime, or rejected by fascist regimes that favoured
romanticized nationalistic imagery, had spent time strategizing for postwar
reconstruction at all scales: from Corbusier’s ideal cities to Jane Drew’s

designs for ideal kitchens. And, for Corbusier, the Unité’s béton brut, brises
soleil, sculptural forms, and vivid colours fulfilled the promise of such
strategies, yielding a revised imagery for postwar modern architecture,
proposing a kind of technological prehistory.

Intertextual imagery also characterized the other most striking postwar
Corbusier project: the Chapel of Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, 1949, on
a hilltop surveying the Vosges mountains, replacing a chapel destroyed in
war. Corbusier, with Protestant ancestry and rakish tastes, was an odd
appointment for the Catholic establishment, but he was championed by
Dominican monk Father Couturier who edited the magazine Sacred Art.

The chapel seemed radically new but also strangely familiar (Figure 16). A
weighty, swelling roof over-sailed the chapel’s massively thick south wall,
punctured with numerous deep windows of apparently random size and
placement. It also over-sailed the concave east elevation, containing an
outdoor altar and pulpit, with an icon of the Virgin Mary skewered on a rod
in a window above. Three curved towers, two back-to-back and one at right
angles, loomed over the roof, which sloped to a giant spout washing
rainwater into a pool containing a concrete pyramid and cone. The cave-like
interior, whose floor inclined with the hillside, was reached through an
outsize pivoting door enamelled with a bright allegorical mural. The
placement of key interior elements—altar, cross, pulpit, pews—reflected the
geometry of the bulging ceiling. And the darkness within was punctured by
shafts of illumination from the various openings, supplemented by ethereal
light emanating from a thin strip of perimeter glass where the roof was
lifted slightly above the walls.

16. Chapel of Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, France, 1949.
Radically new and yet strangely familiar, three towers project above a
swelling roof which over-sails the chapel’s massive south wall,
punctured with deep windows of apparently random size and
placement. The curving east elevation contains an outdoor altar and
pulpit with an icon of the Virgin Mary skewered on a rod in a window
above. The chapel works on the levels of raw experience and academic
sophistication, ambiguous enough to keep offering fresh meanings.
(Architect: Le Corbusier.)

The chapel was engineered to achieve the forms Corbusier wanted, rather
than following the logic of its materials. Its seemingly weighty roof was
actually constructed like an aeroplane wing from slender struts. The walls
were not solid concrete, as they first appear, but instead concrete frame
infilled with rubble from the previous chapel, or reinforcement mesh onto
which cement was sprayed, all covered over with white render.

The chapel pursued Corbusier’s enigmatic ideas about order and balance.
Charles Jencks likened its shape to ‘a nun’s cowl, a monk’s hood, a ship’s
prow, praying hands ... [all] suggested ... and denied at the same time’. Its
towers have been imagined as standing stones, Neolithic funerary
monuments, and vessels. Its forms have been read in the erotic terms of the
naked body, as bellies, buttocks and breasts, and its sprayed concrete as
human skin. The multiple meanings of its shapes echo Corbusier’s
paintings, made concrete in search of poetic potential for postwar modern
architecture. To his champions, the chapel represented a profoundly
evocative rumination on human spirituality, its strange forms articulating
enigmatically the ineffable mysteries of existence.

As with other kinds of intertextuality in film and literature, the more you
know—in this instance about art, architecture, theology, and philosophy—
the more the chapel gives back. This is not to say that ‘clever’ readings are
right and ‘unknowing’ readings are wrong. Rather, it works on the levels of
both raw experience and academic sophistication, done with sufficient
ambiguity to keep offering fresh interpretations.

Like the Unité, the chapel again broke the tentative conventions of modern
architecture. British architect James Stirling suggested that it prompted a
‘crisis of rationalism’, its striking ‘plastic’ forms requiring committed
modernists to revisit the principles of their work. Ronchamp and the Unité
took concrete from a straightforward expression of modernity—replacing
loadbearing walls with frames and planes—to something altogether more
complex, simultaneously modern and prehistoric. Both buildings spawned
imitations, from close copies to comparable intertextual exercises.

Corbusier built five more Unités in France and Germany, but it was the
Marseille block that became the model for swathes of Cold War housing in
both the free-market West and communist East. Despite being widely
copied, it was rarely understood well by its imitators. Raw concrete, which
fared adequately in Marseille’s hot dry climate, survived less well in
climates with damaging cycles of freeze and thaw. The Unité’s community
facilities—shops, recreation roofscape, concierge, and lift attendants—
rarely figured in the copies, producing housing silos that were often

isolating, failing to mitigate anti-social behaviour. The Unité model thus
became condemned as a failure.

In postwar decades, béton brut, and the intertextual form-making associated
with it, symbolized a decisive rejection of the terror wrought by fascism. It
described a new beginning—imagined partly in relation to ancient
beginnings—which aspired to recombine community, technology, and
architecture with a renewed sense of purpose. Today, however, that
aspiration has been largely forgotten. Béton brut got tainted by the
reputation of failed high-rise housing. And that failure continues to colour
how people think about concrete architecture, and—indeed—modem
architecture altogether.

Global brutalisms

Using the term ‘brutalism’ to celebrate the architecture of béton brut must
rate as one of the worst promotional ideas ever. Banham popularized the
term in his 1966 book The New Brutalism: Ethic or Aesthetic? It emerged
from young British architects’ reactions against postwar housebuilding
there, where cheap moderm-ish picturesque cottages became branded ‘the
new humanism’. Banham’s book collected the work of young architects
who found this bland and who, inspired by the imagery of the Unité and
Ronchamp, parodied it with a Corbusian ‘new brutalism’. Banham’s subtitle
illustrated how Brutalists believed their architecture had both a distinctive
look and a moral purpose, adding expressive materials and bold shapes to
the interwar modern imagery of function and structure. Brutalism meant
dramatic silhouettes, the clear display of structure, ‘primitive’ traditions in
art, celebrating the ‘essences’ of materials in their raw ‘as-found’ state—not
only, but importantly, reinforced concrete—and the nickname, ‘Brutus’, of
one of Banham’s friends: the male half of architect duo Alison and Peter
Smithson. The Smithsons’ own evolving definition focused more on
Brutalism’s ‘ethic’, emphasizing concerns with people’s everyday lives.

When Brutalism fell out of favour, the name allowed its detractors to
dismiss its buildings as brutal in their treatment of people. That’s how
Brutalism is popularly remembered, forgetting how the term once declared

ambitions for postwar rebuilding. Indeed, modern architecture’s detractors
have since expanded the term beyond what was recognized as Brutalism at
the time to dismiss pretty much any modern building they don’t like.

Banham’s British examples of Brutalism came from the offices of the
Smithsons, Stirling and Gowan, Denys Lasdun, and Erné Goldfinger,
adding examples from Western Europe, Japan, and the Americas. The term
caught on, also employed to describe buildings from the offices of Paul
Rudolph and Louis I. Kahn in the USA, and notably Kallmann, McKinnell,
and Knowle’s striking Boston City Hall. Indeed, Brutalism became more
international than the International Style ever was, although influential
Western critics struggled to acknowledge its global diversity.

Brazil’s modern architecture did get noticed in the West following a MoMA
exhibition in 1943 which simultaneously celebrated and patronized
Brazilian architectural culture. The 1936 Ministry of Health building in Rio
de Janeiro, designed by Lucio Costa and his team, anticipated the Marseille
Unité by nine years: clad in brises soleil, with a sculptural roofscape. Not
yet quite Brutalist, it nevertheless looked substantially weightier than
regular interwar modernism. Western histories say this building quotes from
Corbusier’s work, acknowledging time Corbusier spent in Rio, failing to
recognize that the trade in ideas was clearly mutual. Costa’s projects of the
1930s and 1940s combined brises-soleil, verandahs, and trellises with local
elements—artisan tilework, tiled panels, and Portugese mosaics—and he
argued (as Elisabetta Andreoli and Adrian Forty note) that it was these
‘local elements which made Brazilian architecture “modern” ’. Brazilian
Brutalists produced remarkable work, among them Jodo Batista Vilanova
Artigas, Paolo Mendes de Rocha, Jorge Machado Moriera, Fabio Penteado,
and Oscar Niemeyer. Niemeyer became most famous. His Church of St
Francis in Pampulha, Belo Horizonte, 1940—a group of timber-lined,
mosaic-finished, concrete shell vaults, connected to a chimney-like
‘campanile’ by a tilted canopy—was so radical that the Church initially
refused to consecrate it.

Costa masterplanned Brazil’s new capital, Brasilia—begun 1956,
inaugurated 1960, and designated a World Heritage Site in 1987. Its sleek

government buildings, from Niemeyer’s studio, strike dramatic poses
against a flat horizon. The thin twin concrete towers of the National
Congress, 1960, sit across a podium from the Senate—a dome—and the
Chamber of Deputies—a matching inverted dome—both 1958.

Italian-bom Brazilian architect Lina Bo Bardi only became famous
posthumously. The structure of her Sao Paulo Museum of Art, 1968—a
concrete ‘portico’ standing only on two pairs of legs placed a huge 70
metres apart—created a public plaza at ground level, opening views from
Trianon Park to the city (Figure 17). Andreoli and Forty argue that newness
is particularly valued in Brazil, where little architecture isn’t either new or
decayed. Famous Brutalist buildings there, they suggest, remain more
current than buildings finished since.

—_
17. Sao Paulo Museum of Art, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1968. A dramatic
illustration of the power of so-called ‘brutalist’ imagery. A concrete
‘portico’, standing on only two pairs of legs placed a huge 70 metres
apart, makes a public plaza at ground level, opening views from
Trianon Park to the city, (Architect: Lina Bo Bardi.)

If Western critics patronized Brazilian brutalism, they mostly ignored the
Soviet Union—partly because it was harder to find information in the Cold
War, but largely because they barely tried—and Soviet architects were
always more conversant with Western ideas. Western critics stereotyped
Soviet modernism as blank and rigidly functional, characterized by
prefabricated concrete slab blocks and windswept plazas. Indeed, that
perception prevails today, ignoring some striking projects and innovations.
The Soviet bloc was a centralized economy where the general secretary of
the Communist Party dictated architectural policy. Nikita Krushchev, who
governed from 1953 to 1964, rejected Stalin’s decorative preferences and,
seeking to solve a massive housing crisis, championed prefabrication,
directing that 90 per cent of buildings should be built using prefabricated

concrete panel systems. Numerous iterations, technical developments,
profiles, and textures of these systems proved innovative and effective. But
the non-system built projects, mostly cultural and government institutions,
now attract most attention. Leonid Brezhnev, general secretary from 1964 to
1982, encouraged more architectural freedom. The resulting diversity of
invention has sometimes been included in the category of Brutalism, for
example: a stack of double storey Jenga blocks containing offices for the
Georgian Ministry of Highways in Tibilisi, 1974, designed by G.
Tschachawa and colleagues; cantilevered swooping twin cinemas at
Rossiya, Yerevan, Armenia, designed by A. Tarkhanyan and colleagues in
1975; and a faceted ovaloid hotel perched above a beach on three giant
circular legs, designed by Igor Vailevsky, in Yalta, Ukraine, 1985. Western
publishers have recently discovered these projects, albeit depicting them as
kitschy communist chic while scarcely acknowledging their spatial and
formal innovations.

Almost two-thirds of African nations were liberated from Western
colonizers between 1957 and 1966. Brutalism and béton brut frequently
provided architectural symbols of independence, representing new nations
forged in a modern technological world. The resulting buildings could be
somewhat contradictory, however. The domed National Museum of Ghana
in Accra, 1957, curated an idea of Ghanaian national identity following the
19th-century Western model of the national museum, and its architects—
Maxwell Fry, Jane Drew, Lindsay Drake, and Denys Lasdun—were hired
from Britain, the former colonizer. Economic development in postcolonial
Africa sometimes emphasized the sale of minerals and extraction rights,
frequently involving Western-owned international corporations, who have
been seen as colonizers of another kind. Indeed, the idea of the architect as
professional consultant, and the idea that architecture should symbolize
modernity, were also Western imports. Israeli architects were sometimes
hired for nation-building projects in African countries to address the
contradictions. From another former colony—one which forged a reputation
for modern architecture as Mandatory Palestine in the interwar period—
they seemed sympathetic to the issues. Examples include Hotel Ivoire in
Abidjan, Ivory Coast, 1970, designed by Thomas Leitersdorf and Heinz
Fenchel, and Ife University in Nigeria, 1972, designed by Areih Sharon.
The striking Findeco House in Lusaka, Zambia, 1976, designed by

Yugoslav architects Dusan Milenkovic and Branimir Ganovic, illustrates
how architects were also hired in some new African nations from Soviet
Eastern Europe.

Specific national and regional modern architectures, and prominent African
architects, frequently emerged only some years after liberation. In Senegal,
for example, the Brutalism of Pierre Goudiaby Atepa—like the Atepa
Group Headquarters, 1977—and Cheikh N’Gom—including Immeuble
Faycal, Dakar, 1984—was marked by sculptural forms characterized by
distinctive pyramidal shapes.

Until the 21st century, the global architectural media tended only to
recognize buildings in Africa designed by European and American
architects, plus those that conformed to Western expectations. And such
projects were frequently written up as a generic ‘tropical architecture’,
rather than as specific buildings for specific sites in specific cultures.

Banham’s term New Brutalism stuck, albeit at the lasting expense of its
architecture. In some Western cultures, like the UK, property developers
have recently exploited the poor cultural reputation of Brutalism to
demolish and densify valuable sites for substantial profit. In such instances,
it became expedient to assume that all concrete architecture was Brutalist,
and all Brutalist architecture was undesirable. Meanwhile, in various global
cultures—like Brazil, and certain postcolonial African countries—Brutalist
buildings maintain different associations, frequently marking positive
change and freedom from colonial repression.

Metabolists, megastructures, and mats

If Radiant City represented the translation of interwar modernism into
urban form, then the ‘megastructure’ came to represent Brutalist urban
form. The term was popularized by Banham (again), but first coined in
Japan by architect Fumihiko Maki, who was part of the so-called
‘metabolism group’, including Kenzo Tange. Tange’s office famously
designed a peace memorial and exhibition hall at Hiroshima, 1955, claimed
for Brutalism. Simultaneously, Tange was conducting academic research

with colleagues at the University of Tokyo’s Urban Lab, investigating the
densification of that city in response to a perceived lack of building sites
there. Statistical modelling was used to analyse commuting patterns,
transport, and traffic congestion, testing migration theory in relation to
economic development.

This work tapped broader contemporary intellectual currents around so-
called ‘systems thinking’. Systems thinking understood everything—from
aeroplanes to traffic flows to human bodies and natural landscapes—as
complex, interrelated systems that could be measured and analysed
mathematically. Motivated by the earliest computers fed with punch cards,
it prompted its followers to think systematically—like computers—
encouraging the extensive analysis of data and imagining issues like urban
sprawl as problems to be solved. This approach tapped into a renewed
technological optimism in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Prompted by
early televisions and fridges installed in prosperous homes, by the Soviets’
first satellite, Sputnik, by NASA’s moonshots and burgeoning air travel,
systems thinking appeared to propose the scientific transformation of
everyday life in Western cultures.

‘Metabolist’ architects—including Tange, Kiyonoru Kikutake, and Kisho
Kurokawa—made two key arguments. First, that different parts of the city
—like urban core and suburb—have different rates of ‘metabolic’ change.
Second, that new land needed in Tokyo and other cities could be made by
reclaiming the sea, and decking-over infrastructure like railways,
motorways, and even existing districts. Megastructures were conceived as
built land: fixed infrastructures, sometimes kilometres long, enabling
development. They were imagined as technical frameworks, planned
according to social theories, for systematizing transport and service
provision.

Tange proposed several unbuilt megastructures. The Boston Harbour
Development Project, designed with MIT students in 1959, proposed giant
A-frame containers, with motorways and transit systems at their base, into
which buildings could be slotted. The striking images and models elevated
béton brut to another level of monumentality. The Tokyo Bay Project, 1960,

proposed an 18-kilometre concrete framework across the water comprising
two parallel motorways whose loops made sub-districts, with offshoots
leading to housing sectors (Figure 18). Its open-ended structure allowed

whole districts of buildings to be infilled, imagined as capable of unlimited
extension.

proposal: a dramatic concrete framework comprising two parallel
motorways whose loops made sub-districts, with offshoots leading to
housing sectors. It illustrated so-called ‘systems thinking’: an open-
ended structure allowing districts of buildings to be infilled, imagined
as capable of unlimited extension. (Architect: Kenzo Tange.)

In 1963, Georges Candilis, Alexis Josic, and Shadrach Woods, with
Manfred Schiedhelm won a competition to design a building for the new
Free University in West Berlin. Like Tange’s megastructures, it was
designed for infinite extension and perpetual change. The architects
conceived groups of rooms as clusters within a larger structure, divided by
corridors imagined as a grid of alleyways and courtyards like an Arabic
medina. The interior was a kind of labyrinth. Entrances around the
building’s perimeter were deliberately multiplied to contradict the
hierarchies of conventional universities, with their grand entrances and
marble halls, conceiving the building instead as a city district. The concrete-
framed structure was finished with a pattern of windows and ‘cor-ten’
(rusty) steel panels that, in theory at least, could be reconfigured to suit
internal alterations. Alison Smithson referred to mini-megastructures like
the Free University—and Corbusier’s contemporaneous project for a Venice
hospital—as ‘mat buildings’, thinking their plans looked like Turkish rugs.
She argued that they comprised a system of basic units—streets, rooms, and
squares—repeated and varied like a child’s puzzle.

Dutch architect John Habraken claimed the megastructure was a political
idea. His book Supports: An Alternative to Mass Housing, 1961, argued that
the state should provide infrastructure for housing—the ‘supports’—and
that people should construct buildings themselves within those supports. He
promoted ‘self-build’: empowering people to construct their own homes.
The image of Habraken’s megastructures diverged from Tange’s Brutalist
consistency. They were characterized instead as a chaotic, spontaneous
assembly of homes expressing individual character. Habraken’s vision
remained contradictory, simultaneously bottom-up and top-down,
celebrating both centralized control and the power of individual choice.

The most striking built megastructure was a housing cooperative named
‘Habitat’ in Montreal, Canada, made for the 1967 Expo there (Figure 19).
Designed by Moshie Safdie, it comprised 354 standardized rectangular
modules. Constructed by stacking prefabricated concrete boxes like Lego
bricks, it drew its imagery from traditional Mediterranean villages and
Italian hill towns. Its stepping form looked impossibly complicated but was
guided by a systematic order of structure and repetition.

19. Habitat, Montreal, 1967. A model community whose imagery drew
from traditional Mediterranean villages and hill towns. Constructed
by stacking prefabricated concrete boxes, its stepping form looked
impossibly complicated but was guided by a rigorous order of
structure and repetition. (Architect: Moshe Safdie.)

Habitat was directly descended from Hennebique’s house, its pattern of
terraces extending the logic of the cantilever and the roof garden, taking the
imagery of concrete modem architecture to a further extreme. However, if
steel was readily imagined as a kit of parts, then the architectural and urban
logics of reinforced concrete always remained more ambiguous. Concrete
could make frames, planes, cantilevers, and sculptural shapes, be extended
into megastructures, structure communities, and be formed with a profound
sense of human purpose. It could constitute the sleek surfaces of the five
points or be roughed-up as béton brut. The modernity of its imagery
stemmed primarily from its potential to assume novel forms, and its
capacity to portray intertextual references. Somehow, reinforced concrete
architecture could stand for industry and domesticity, capitalism and

socialism, planning and spontaneity, the sacred and the profane, newness
and ancientness all at once. More than steel, concrete always illustrated
modernity’s double edged-ness, recalling both the social opportunities of
technology and the continuing unease surrounding technology’s
consequences. When Corbusier and others wrestled with concrete’s material
complexities, they found they were wrestling directly with the cultural
complexities of modernity itself. Ultimately, concrete finishes became only
patchily accepted. And ‘brutal’ and ‘ugly’ became lazy ciphers for their
multiple ambiguities. Concrete encouraged the re-imagination of modern
architecture, but its peculiarities also exposed modern architecture to
question. That remained both its strength and its weakness.

Chapter 4
Brick

Another tradition of modern architecture

Few cowsheds figure in the histories of architecture. One that does, along
with an adjacent barn, was completed in 1925 on Gut Gurkau Farm near
Liibeck, Germany, to designs by Hugo Haring (Figure 20). Haring was part
of a group called ‘The Ring’, which included Mies, that rejected
architectural decoration in favour of technical efficiency. The cowshed’s
farmer client believed agriculture should be rethought rationally, and Haring
justified his designs functionally, developing them in relation to technical
research. He noted proudly that ‘the disposal of dung from the stalls is
achieved in a single channel without reversal’, adding that, because of the
curving plan, ‘the animals do not stand directly opposite each other, so the
threat of infection through inhaling one another’s contaminated breath is
reduced’. The adjacent barn had a remarkable ‘lamella’ roof—an outsize
upside-down boat—replacing traditional rafters with a ‘gridshell’ of criss-
crossed timbers. This too was justified functionally, because it improved
structural efficiency, and reduced the sizes of timbers required.

20. Cowshed at Gut Garkau Farm, Germany, 1925. Initially
interpreted as an ideal translation of a sequence of tasks into a
building—a leading example of ‘functionalism’—it later became
reappraised for its bold imagery, and then as a symbol of a less rigid
modern architecture accepting modernity as an extension of history,
rather than a rejection of it. (Architect: Huge Haring.)

Freed from the complex cultural associations of buildings for humans, the
cowshed became interpreted as an ideal translation of a sequence of tasks
into a building, as a leading example of functionalism. Likewise, the barn
roof was understood as a novel but straightforward expression of function.
Haring’s functionalist buildings looked different to those of Mies and
Gropius, however—being shapelier, curving in plan and section—and
because, while their forms were clearly new, they were constructed in
traditional materials of brick, timber, and tile.

Brutalists in the 1960s reappraised these farm buildings, celebrating their
bold imagery more than the functionalist arguments. Other critics
reappraised them again in the 1970s and 1980s, claiming them instead as
symbols of a lost path in modern architecture. These critics—including
Christian Norberg-Schulz, Kenneth Frampton, Peter Blundell Jones, and
Colin St John Wilson, architect of the British Library—championed the
idea of ‘another tradition’ of modern architecture, arguing that a wrong tum
was taken in the 1920s and 1930s. They continued to celebrate modern
architecture as a reflection of up-to-date culture, novel construction, new
forms of social life, and changed imagery. But they suggested that it lost its
way in the interwar years. Ideas about zoning cities became too rigid, they
believed, the organization of buildings around functions became too hard-
line, and the categories of the International Style and the five points became
too formulaic. Historians have suggested that these criticisms crystallized
during postwar meetings of CIAM, when a group of ‘angry young men’—
including Alison (!) and Peter Smithson, Aldo van Eyck, Georges Candilis,
and Shadrach Woods—challenged the orthodoxies of prewar modernism
and the urban forms of the Athens Charter. These differences came to a
head at CIAM’s tenth meeting in Dubrovnik, 1956, where this group
organized an informal breakaway named Team 10. When CIAM voted itself
out of existence in 1959, Team 10 continued to meet. The group is now
credited with more influence than it had at the time, largely because the
divergent stories of its protagonists have helped historians illustrate the
increasing diversity of postwar modern architecture.

Alison Smithson, the group’s self-appointed historian, collected their ideas
and projects from the 1950s and 1960s in her Team 10 Primer. She argued
that the group was less concerned with the image-making of high
architecture than with ordinary people’s lives in ordinary homes and streets,
studying how communities associated with their surroundings, and so-
called socio-psychological needs. Key reference points were academic
anthropologists: ‘structuralists’, who looked for patterns in people’s
inhabitation of their surroundings across different times and cultures. Many
Team 10 members acknowledged globalized trade and capital as inevitable,
but also sought to reconnect modern architecture with local cultures and
diverse building practices. They preferred to think of architecture’s settings
in terms of ‘place’—as the everyday situations and events of human life—

rather than ‘space’—as an abstract idea. ‘Whatever space and time mean,’
Aldo van Eyck wrote, ‘place and occasion mean more’. Projects by Team
10 architects—such as Ralph Erskine’s housing designs in Sweden, and
Giancarlo de Carlo’s university community perched on a hillside above
Urbino, Italy—got included in the catalogues of the ‘other tradition’. Like
Gut Garkau’s barn, they seemed tailored to rhythms of life, and ideas about
the sociability of community. This thinking also became associated with the
long history of brick as a material. Brick, in the work of architects like
Team 10, denoted that modernity might be understood less as a new
beginning for human history than as an extension of it.

Many global cultures have traditions of clay or mud brick construction.
Evidence exists of the use of fired brick as long ago as 5000 BcE in
Mesopotamia, and of decorative brickwork in Babylon in approximately
2300 BcE. In Ancient Rome, fired clay bricks were first used for
strengthening the corners of buildings and openings in walls, then for whole
buildings from the Age of Augustus (63 BCE-14 CE). The use of cement
paste mortars to bind bricks together has been traced to 500 BcE in Ancient
Greece, although modern mortars—mixed with Portland Cement—became
widespread only in mid-19th-century Europe.

Until the 19th century, brickmaking in northern Europe was largely
seasonal. Farmers shaped clay bricks in wooden moulds when there was
little other work in winter. The firing of those bricks, requiring temperatures
between 900 °C and 1,100 °C, involved as much luck as judgement. Each
brick’s hardness depended on its proximity to the flames and the heat of the
fire. The hardest, most burnt, bricks were waterproof, called ‘foundation’,
‘cellar’, or ‘arch’ bricks, reflecting where they were used. The least baked
‘salmon’ bricks were soft, set aside for internal partitions. And regular
baked bricks, ‘commons’, were employed for external walls.

These basic brick types persisted after production was industrialized in the
mid-19th century. Steam-powered manufacturing, particularly in the USA,
added so-called ‘wire cut’ bricks—trimmed from clay extruded by
machines—and sharp-edged ‘dry press’ bricks—made from clay forced into
moulds at high pressure. The most important industrial innovations,

however, were in brick firing. Early kilns were made and broken for each
firing, but the first permanent Hoffman kiln was constructed in Germany in
1858 with multiple chambers and air ducts to control temperatures
accurately. Reliable firing improved the predictability of brickmaking, and
increased the range of hardnesses available. At the same time, modern
excavation techniques yielded a greater variety of clays in different colours
and textures. This extended the possibilities available to architects for
expressing brick surfaces, supplementing variety in the ‘pointing’ of mortar
joints (e.g. mortar smeared flush with the bricks, or raked out to create
shadows, or expressed as broad or fine lines).

Brick became so important to the advocates of ‘another tradition’ in modern
architecture that their alternative history became more-or-less a collection
of famous brick buildings from the period of modernity. That history tended
to start with 19th-century Arts and Crafts architecture in Britain;
specifically the Red House, Bexleyheath, 1859, designed by Philip Webb
for writer, artist, and industrialist William Morris, sometimes promoted as a
progenitor of the modern free plan. It emphasized Frank Lloyd Wright’s
brick houses like the Robie House, 1909, and included the ‘expressive’
Wright-inspired brickwork of Klint and Klint’s Grundtvig Church,
Copenhagen, Denmark, 1927, and Willem Dudok’s Hilversum Town Hall,
the Netherlands, 1931, alongside Haring’s cowshed and barn. Their story
was that the simplistic visual prescriptions of the International Style
overtook modern architecture’s original purpose: to rethink architecture for
the age of modernity and industrial production. They argued that this
alternative lineage—contrasting Gut Garkau with Corbusier’s almost
contemporary project for a Radiant Farm—showed how modern
architecture shouldn’t be understood as the refinement of a static set of
forms towards perfection, as in Mies’s work, but should be understood
instead as an ongoing negotiation with diverse localities, peoples, and
cultures. It should illustrate a continuing dialogue with ever-changing shifts
in modernity, they felt, not be frozen as a static repertoire of forms.

In Chapters 2 and 3, I showed how technical innovations in iron, steel, and
reinforced concrete produced new possibilities for organizing architecture
and new architectural images, and I highlighted architectural theories
emerging in relation to the new imagery. The role of brick in modern

architecture was different, however. It was a familiar rather than novel
material, and its inherent organizational logic was already well known. The
adoption of brick into modern architecture represented instead a challenge
to the hard-line view of modernity as a rejection of history, understanding
modern architecture differently as a continuation of history.

The local and the national

Critics found a definitive example of this moder brick imagery on the
island of Saéynatsalo in rural Finland, in a civic building completed in 1951
for a small community centred on a plywood mill, which incorporated a
town hall, library, and shops (Figure 21). Its architect, Alvar Aalto, is
remembered as the leading light of Scandinavian modern design, combining
warm materials with simple shapes to make objects imagined as available to
all. Aalto designed mass-produced stools, chairs, light fittings, and
glassware in this spirit as well as buildings. His work became characterized
as ‘expressionist’, discussed in terms of ‘organic’ geometries.

21. Saynatsalo Town Hall, Finland, 1951. Steps lead from the street to
a courtyard surrounded by low roofs, and a council chamber above
expressed with a distinctive ‘butterfly’ roof. The imagery of the
complex refers both to modernity and history, to so-called high culture
and low culture, recalling the everyday spaces of local farmers and (no
less) the Greco-Roman idea of human civilization. (Architect: Alvar
Aalto.)

Sdayndtsalo Town Hall was located on a hillside in a forest clearing. It
appeared initially unassuming, arranged around a courtyard with low roofs.
The council chamber, rising above the low roof ridges, was expressed as a
tower with a distinctive ‘butterfly’ roof that accentuated its height and
emphasized its civic role. The courtyard was wrapped with a glazed cloister,
reached by a grand stair leading up from the street. The buildings were
constructed from pressed red bricks which Aalto instructed the bricklayers
to set slightly out-of-line, giving the walls an undulating rustic quality,
playing shadows across their surface in low northern sunlight. The roof of

the council chamber, reached by a brick-lined and brick-floored staircase,
was supported with timber trusses shaped like upturned hands.

The complex was intense for its diminutive size, accentuated by Aalto-
designed fixtures including handles, handrails, and light fittings. Doors
were understood not just as openings but as thresholds between realms.
Windows were imagined as frames to the forest. Sequences of spaces were
conceived as journeys through light and dark, compressing people through
smaller spaces and releasing them into larger ones. The experience of the
building was carefully choreographed and its details thoughtfully calibrated.
Its orderly plan and section were derived from functional needs, and also
carefully adapted to local culture, climate, and the topography of the site.

Aalto made plenty of intertextual references. He did this differently to
Corbusier, looking more to architectural traditions and the ancient classical
past than to industrial forms and artistic shape-making. Saéyndtsalo Town
Hall’s organization around a courtyard recalled local farmsteads and the
cloisters of historic monasteries. Sat into a slope, it can be read as both a
classical temple on a plinth and a fragment of a picturesque Italian hill
town. Vertical timber slats fixed to doors and windows hinted at both the
fluting of columns in classical architecture and the tree trunks of the
surrounding forest. The red brick, here, referred more to humble industrial
buildings than grand public ones, and to long traditions of brickmaking.
Thus, the building played artful double games. Its imagery combined
references to both modernity and history, to so-called high culture and low
culture, recalling the everyday spaces of local farmers and (no less!) the
Greco-Roman tradition of human civilization. It evoked a northern romance
about Mediterranean life, alongside an idea of the forest as psychological
retreat that remains prominent in Finnish culture. Critics understood the
building as a synthesis of global modernism with local sensibilities,
claiming it as an image of modern Finnishness and Scandinavianness.

Identity claims like these relate to a strand of architectural history which
seeks national characteristics reflected in buildings, trying to isolate, say,
authentically Finnish, or Australian, or Korean architectures. Such histories
have usually celebrated premodern buildings—valorizing traditional

construction techniques that worked local materials in response to local
climates. They tend to identify indigenous characteristics and understand
them to be threatened by globalized finance and industry, and by the
international industrial building materials which have grown to dominate
construction.

Political historian Benedict Anderson argued in his book Imagined
Communities, 1983, that ideas of nation and nationalism were themselves
products of modernity. Anderson linked the modern importance of the
nationstate to the overthrow of absolute monarchies in the 18th and 19th
centuries in the West. He attributed ideas of the nation to the simultaneous
rise of print media and literacy. He connected them to a loss of shared
religious values coinciding with the rise of modern science and new
economic interests at the time of the Industrial Revolution. It was no
coincidence, Anderson argued, that the creation of republics in the Western
hemisphere between 1776 and 1838 paralleled the emergence and
widespread consumption of national languages, distributed by burgeoning
printing presses.

This new notion of nation, associated with ideas of patriotism, took root
rapidly. In the 19th century, the construction of museums telling national
stories, the first mappings of national territories, and the collection of
census data, consolidated formations of nation. Emerging stories about
national identities usually included some groups and excluded others,
making claims about who belonged and who didn’t. Anderson argued that
conceptions of nation associated people with others they hadn’t yet met by
encouraging them to imagine themselves together as a collective. The
power of the idea became illustrated by people’s willingness to risk their
lives for it in war.

Claims about national architectures have always been freighted with
difficult questions: what—and therefore who—gets included in, and
excluded from, particular national histories; how does architecture get used
politically to claim certain ideas of nationhood and reject others? In some
postcolonial countries, and in minority nations asserting their identity, the
project of cataloguing and producing national architectures has been seen as

vital in curating national identity. Examples include the early 20th-century
buildings of Antoni Gaudi, linked to Catalan identity, or Oscar Niemeyer’s
projects symbolizing modern Brazil. Bombastic claims to national
architectures have also been made by fascist regimes, who used buildings to
aggrandize power and emphasize military might. These included, for
example, the puffed-up projects of Albert Speer for Nazi Germany,
associated with that regime’s sinister nationalist rhetoric of ‘blood and soil’.
The dark shadows cast by Speer’s architecture—and what it stood for—
illustrate the risks of any claims to national architectures. Yet, among the
champions of the ‘other tradition’, attempts persisted to claim a role for
local identities, cultures, and histories in modernity. They hoped to illustrate
that the emergence of global cultures didn’t necessarily involve the
rejection of local ones. This thinking crystallized in the 1990s around the
term ‘critical regionalism’—coined by Liane Lefaivre and Alexander
Tzonis, and popularized by Kenneth Frampton—which described the idea
of indigenous modern architectures sensitive to site, culture, history, and
identity. However, champions of critical regionalism have had to work very
hard to claim that such architectures—like Saynatsalo Town Hall—are
somehow more authentic because they respond to a local sense of place
while simultaneously navigating dangerous associations with bombastic
nationalisms.

Monumentality and order: Louis I. Kahn

The most striking images of modern brickwork were found in the buildings
of Louis I. Kahn (1901-74; no relation to Albert Kahn), the third superhero
of modern architecture I’ll introduce. If Mies was modernism’s obsessive
perfectionist, and Corbusier its establishment iconoclast, then Kahn was its
zen mystic. Kahn wrote—reminiscent of Taoist philosophy—that a great
building ‘must begin with the unmeasurable, must go through measurable
means when it is being designed, and in the end must be unmeasurable’.
Kahn’s aura of spirituality was captured in aphorisms like this, which
pervaded his accounts of his buildings and his teaching. Like Team 10’s
members, Kahn emphasized modern architecture’s insistence on the
expression of structure, material, and function, while also challenging the
idea of an International Style as dry and prescriptive. Also like Team 10,
Kahn sought to reconnect modem architecture with older ideas about

human culture and social life. But, while Team 10 looked to anthropology
and ‘structuralist’ ideas for inspiration, seeking timeless patterns in human
behaviour, Kahn looked to architectural history and to mystical ideas about
the origins of human imagination. He believed that timeless insights
remained present in the mysterious flickers of creative intuition, and in the
traces of ancient civilizations found in historic ruins. ‘What was has always
been,’ he wrote, ‘what is has always been, and what will be has always
been’.

Kahn was born Itze-Leib Schmuilowsky on a Baltic island now called
Saaremaa, then in Russia but now in Estonia. His family emigrated to
America in 1906—to Philadelphia—changing their names to suit their
English-speaking environment. From a poor background, scarred by
childhood burns, Kahn was reputedly a shy teenager. But his prodigious
talents for drawing and piano playing became noticed. He trained as an
architect in his beloved adopted city, at the University of Pennsylvania,
whose curriculum was inspired by the classicism of Paris’s Ecole des
Beaux-Arts. Following a year travelling in Europe in 1928, sketching
ancient sites in Italy, Kahn embraced modem architecture. But it was
another grand tour—a few months at the American Academy of Rome in
1950/1—that apparently transformed his thinking. Kahn had become
prominent in the US architectural profession by the 1950s: a charismatic
presence in the T-Square Club for architects in Philadelphia, chair of a
Federal Public Housing Agency committee, teaching at Yale University. But
it was only in his 50s that Kahn became famous, claiming finally to have
found his architectural identity.

The building Kahn credited with this self-discovery was superficially
unremarkable: a bath house for the Trenton Jewish Community Center in
Ewing Township, New Jersey, 1959, which became a diminutive prototype
for subsequent projects (Figure 22). It was designed in collaboration with
Anne Tyng, whose deep appreciation of geometry had a decisive influence
—although, like many women of modern architecture, her substantial
contribution went unrecognized for many years. The plan of the bath house
formed a cross comprised of five squares. The central square was an
unroofed courtyard, an ‘unprogrammed?’ space initially containing a shallow
circular basin. The four surrounding squares were topped with their own

sloping ‘hipped’ roofs. These roofs, with square holes open to the sky at
their centres, sat on dumpy square columns containing small spaces. The
roofs did not quite touch at the comers, and appeared poised slightly above
the columns.

22, Trenton Bath House, Ewing Township, New Jersey, USA, 1959, A
simple structure, built from bare blocks with mortar smeared across
their surface, topped with cheap felt roof tiles. The original circular
basin at the centre of this ‘unprogrammed’ space was subsequently
paved over. The Bath House produced an improbably monumental
effect and became the prototype for a series of ‘archaic’, geometric,
monumental buildings designed by Louis I. Kahn’s office indebted to
architectural history. (Architects: Louis I. Kahn, in collaboration with
Anne Tyng.)

The Trenton bath house seemed humble, built from bare concrete blocks (a
sibling of clay brick), with mortar smeared flush with their surface rather

than neatly raked out, topped with cheap felt roof tiles. But its effect was
improbably monumental. What Kahn meant when he said he’d discovered
himself, Neil Levine remarked, is that he’d found a new way to integrate
structure and space by reinterpreting architectures of the distant past. The
roofs were imagined as the poor but noble cousins of ancient domes. For
architects in the know, they referred to the Pantheon in Rome, 126 cE, with
its open ‘oculus’ at the centre. The columns recalled the significance of the
column to architecture’s classical origins. The result, nevertheless, was
inescapably modern. Vincent Scully later claimed an ‘archaic force’ for
Kahn’s newly found architecture, arguing that it accepted ‘no preconditions,
fashions, or habits of design without questioning them profoundly’. The
bath house, he believed, rethought architecture from first principles. Levine
reflected on its ‘abject poverty’ and ‘the opposition between the archetypal
sources of the forms [and] their finish, or lack thereof ... that made the
structure so provocative’.

Yale University Art Gallery—also designed with Tyng, 1953—developed
the approach in a substantial commission. The concrete-framed building
had a pared-down plan layout. It appeared superficially Mies-ian, its
external walls expressed straightforwardly as planes of brick and glass.
Where Mies’s college buildings demonstrated an obsession with lightness,
however, the Yale gallery revelled in heaviness. It crossed Mies’s
preference for purity with Corbusier’s massive postwar concrete, done more
precisely than gloopy béton brut. The gallery’s floor slabs were over a
metre deep, their ceilings expressed as a striking pattern of triangular
indentations, or ‘coffers’. These ‘coffered slabs’ made the structure more
efficient by using less concrete, and they provided space for building
services: the pipes, cables, ducts, stairs, and toilets needed to make the
building work. The mass of these ceilings dominated the interiors,
producing a weighty sense of calm. Their insistent triangular geometry—
matched with one rectangular and one circular stairwell, punched through
the floorslabs—tapped the ancient power of primary shapes. The gallery’s
plan was a geometrical diagram so sophisticated that it came right round
again to simplicity. To architects, it demonstrated the pure integration of a
building’s driving geometric idea with optimized structure and servicing.

The Yale gallery got noticed by the global architectural media. But Kahn’s
international reputation was consolidated through two laboratory buildings
completed in 1965: the Medical Research Towers, later Alfred Newton
Richards Building, on the University of Pennsylvania campus; and the Salk
Institute, on the edge of the Pacific Ocean at La Jolla in Torrey Pines,
California. The Richards Laboratories, constructed in reinforced concrete
and clad in brick, proposed an elegant solution to the containment of all the
building services needed to make labs work—which became widely copied.
Kahn’s plans and sections expressed and separated-out ‘servant’ space (the
pipes, cables, ducts, stairs, and toilets) from ‘served’ space (the laboratories
themselves, conceived like artists’ studios with panoramic corner
windows). The concrete floor was again hollow, so pipes and ducts could
run through it. The structure was expressed on the facgades with a beam that
stepped up between the main vertical columns and the corner, expressing
the structural load path in the beam, while serving to enlarge the scientists’
comer windows. Kahn imagined this as an elegant fusion of lighting and
structural engineering with architectural expression. The underlying
diagram of the building, again, was admirably refined.

These ideas were extended at the Salk Institute, famous for its astonishing
courtyard—paved starkly in travertine, a stone favoured by the Romans—
whose smooth surface was interrupted only by a line of water leading the
eye to the ocean horizon beyond. This courtyard’s radical simplicity
highlighted shadows cast on the surrounding structures by intense
Californian sun. Kahn reflected gnomically that ‘the sun never knew how
great it was until it hit the side of a building’. He felt scientists needed both
their labs in ‘stainless steel and glass’ and separate studies with ‘the oak
table and rug’, expressing these rooms of differing qualities clearly in plan
and section. ‘The room is the place of the mind,’ Kahn ruminated,
memorably describing plans like those of the Richards Laboratories and
Salk Institute as ‘a society of rooms’.

Light and shade in Ahmedabad

Notions about the plan as a society of rooms, about the integration of space,
structure, geometry, lighting, and services, about ancient models for
institutions, and the dignity of monumental architecture, were summarized

in one of Kahn’s last projects: the Indian Institute of Management in
Ahmedabad, commissioned in 1962, and completed the year Kahn died,
1974 (Figure 23). Kahn collaborated with Indian architect Balkrishna
Doshi, who perceived in the American’s work a yogic pursuit of ideas about
the eternal and the soul. Doshi had suggested Kahn’s appointment to the
Sarabhai family, who’d already commissioned designs from Corbusier in
Ahmedabad. At Doshi’s encouragement, Kahn committed to brick as a local
material, working with it as the primary structure rather than as a finish to
reinforced concrete frames like at Yale and the Richards Labs. It was when
Kahn began this project that he famously asked a brick what it wanted to
be, projecting the modern idea about seeking logics inherent in novel
building materials back onto this traditional material, and pursuing a new
imagery for it.

23. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, India, 1974, An
intense conjunction of structure and space, combining material and
structural logics, engaging light, shadow, monumentality, and order,
fusing pure geometries and ancient architectural images through
creative intuition into an architecture that seemed simultaneously new,
archaic, and timeless. (Architect: Louis I. Kahn.)

The group of Institute buildings responded to Ahmedabad’s tropical
climate, to the ancient origins of universities in the architectural form of the
monastery, and to the suggestion that learning happens through human
encounters as much as it does through formal teaching. To this end, staff
and student dormitories were integrated with the institution; imagined
themselves as places of learning. Kahn championed the value of encounter,
describing the complex as ‘a realm of spaces ... connected by ways of
walking ... high spaces together with low spaces, and various spaces where
people can ... find the places where they can do what they want to do’.

A shallow entrance ramp and stair, slowing and dignifying arrival, arrived
adjacent to the library, envisaged as the symbolic heart of the institute. The
teaching building was located in a comer of the plan, its shady cloisters
leading past an (unrealized) open amphitheatre to a proposed dining room.
Further cloisters, arranged on 45-degree diagonals, led from the tree-shaded
plaza at the top of the ramp to rows of dormitories. These were triangular
four-storey houses arranged around so-called tea rooms: cool
‘unprogrammed’ places for impromptu conversations. Each house had
twenty individual rooms with linked ‘servant’ towers containing kitchens
and toilets. Further tree-shaded courts were laid out between. The plan was
highly ordered but the experience of moving through it was rich and
intense, animated by surprising diagonal glimpses and movement between
intense sun and deep shade. These sequences echoed Team 10’s thinking
about maintaining ‘labyrinthine clarity’ in dense, complex buildings, about
the importance of thresholds in enlivening architectural experiences, and
exploiting the social potential of ‘in-between’ spaces. Kahn’s sources were
largely Western: monastic courtyards, the historic quadrangles of Oxford
and Cambridge universities, and dramatic 18th-century etchings of Roman
ruins made by Giovanni Battista Piranesi. Nevertheless, as William Curtis
has remarked, the building became understood in relation to Indian sources:
to the dense urban fabric of Ahmedabad and Jaisalmer, to the linked open
spaces of Rajput fortresses, and the spatial sequences of Fatehpur Sikri.

The complex was concerned with light, shadow, and breeze. Kahn imagined
that sunlight brought architecture to life, understanding architecture as a
canvas for the tracking sun. ‘Structure is the maker of light,’ he wrote: ‘a
column and a column brings light between.’ It was the prevailing wind
direction, though, that drove the 45-degree geometry and the design of
cloisters and tea rooms as breeze catchers. Kahn echoed Victor and Aladar
Olgyay’s 1963 book Design with Climate, subtitled Bioclimatic Approach
to Architectural Regionalism, which discussed the adaptation of modern
architecture to local climates. The buildings’ various openings were
understood, like Corbusier’s brises soleil, as shadow makers,
acknowledging how shade and breeze facilitate sociability, creating places
for people to stop and talk.

While Kahn believed that this promotion of social life was central to his
designs, it was their imagery that primarily attracted the critics’ attention.
Kahn was reputedly unhappy with the Miesian elevations of the Yale Art
Gallery, expressed as thin planes of brick and glass. He believed he’d
brought monumentality to the interiors there but not the fagades. The Indian
Institute of Management’s elevations represented Kahn’s solution to this
perceived problem: plain brick surfaces with giant geometric perforations—
circles, arches, and rectangles. These perforations spanned multiple floors
with smaller openings behind, recessed in shadow. Where there were
window frames, these were set deep so they disappeared into darkness.
Alongside the shading function, this made the brickwork appear
monumental, recalling Kahn’s favourite Roman ruins. While circles,
triangles, and rectangles had become established in Kahn’s architectural
vocabulary by this time, they also recalled the geometries of the 18th-
century Jantar Mantar observatories in Delhi and Jaipur.

The Institute’s giant circular openings were understood as an arch sat on top
of an inverted arch. The arch represented, to Kahn, what brick wanted to be,
demonstrating the structural logic of the material: an inherent illustration of
how structural loads get transmitted to the ground through masonry. But, in
this earthquake zone, Kahn imagined the circle to be a structural idea just as
powerful as the arch. Here, the inverted arch comprising the bottom half of
the circle would occasionally be called upon, in a quake, to bear loads in the
same way that a conventional arch does in normal conditions. Earthquakes
also justified Kahn’s inclusion of so-called blind arches (arches infilled with
brick) to reinforce and animate some of the walls, and characterful concrete
lintels inserted into the base of certain arches to provide extra strength.
These lintels were a knowing reference, for architects, to the gateway at the
Royal Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans, France, 1776, designed by Claude
Nicolas Ledoux. They served to highlight the structural nature of the brick
walls, reinforcing brick’s material logic by highlighting where brick wasn’t
able to perform as well structurally: in tension, where the base of an arch
wants to spread outwards as loads push down on it. The concrete lintels
here were the exception that proved the rule for Kahn, highlighting the
masonry logic of brickwork.

Kahn’s geometric openings, like the Institute as a whole, illustrated his
distinctive idea of modern architecture. They represented an intense
conjunction of structure and space, combining material and structural
logics; engaging light, shadow, monumentality, and order; fusing pure
geometries and ancient architectural images through creative intuition into
buildings that seemed simultaneously new, archaic, and timeless.

Kahn’s buildings became respected for their intellectual integrity but were
less copied than those of Mies or Corbusier. American architect Peter
Eisenman later argued that Kahn’s work sowed the seeds of modern
architecture’s destruction. Kahn, he claimed melodramatically, ‘murdered
modern architecture’ through his return to monumentality and historic
motifs. Whether or not this claim has validity, Kahn’s designs reinforced
claims to another tradition of modern architecture, in brick, negotiating
between the forces of global modernity and the particular sites and social
situations of buildings.

Refashioning architecture from first principles

If Kahn’s work illustrated how modern architecture could remain a way of
thinking rather than a formula, then the Church of St Peter at Klippan,
Sweden, 1966, illustrated how idiosyncratic such thinking could be. There’s
a story about its reclusive architect, Sigurd Lewerentz, standing on site
holding a handful of nails contemplatively. Asked what he was going to do
with them, he apparently replied ‘I don’t know yet, but I’m not just going to
nail two pieces of wood together.’ Every architectural element was
rethought at St Peter’s, making familiar things strange again. At a time
when construction and building components were becoming increasingly
industrialized and mass produced, Lewerentz was on site almost daily,
inventing bespoke details with the foreman and bricklayers.

The church seems low on first approach, its horizontal roofline punctured
only by a chimney. Visitors navigate almost completely around the building
to find the door, their path enclosed by an ‘L’-shaped wing containing the
parish hall and offices: a laborious entrance sequence reputedly expressing
the difficulty of finding God. The interior of the church appears like a dark

cave (Figure 24). From inside, its windows seem just holes in the walls: an
illusion achieved by omitting window frames altogether and instead fixing
glass sheets over the outer face of the wall with bronze clips.

24. Church of St Peter, Klippan, Sweden, 1966. Most aspects of the
church’s construction were rethought afresh, although there was little
attempt to be fashionable. The font is a giant reclaimed sea shell
continuously dripping into a gutter in the floor. Brick vaulted ceilings
were supported by a steel column and beam formed into a ‘T’,
recalling the symbol of the cross. And windows were formed from
sheets of glass simply clipped outside openings in the brick walls.
(Architect: Sigurd Lewerentz.)

The empty church echoes to the sound of water dripping continuously from
the font—a giant sea shell fixed to a metal frame—into a gutter in the floor,
apparently recalling life’s distant origins in water. Not only were its
unadomed walls, undulating floors, and vaulted ceilings made from the
same slim brown brick, so were certain seats, tables, and—notably—the
altar. This furniture seemingly emitted from the floor, giving the impression
that the whole church was carved from a giant block of brickwork. The
brick vaulted ceilings were supported by a steel column and beam formed
into a “T’—unmistakeably, if not immediately, recalling the symbol of the
cross. Its square plan rejected the traditional ‘basilica’ church plan (divided
into nave, aisles, and sanctuary), recalling instead a myth about the earliest
Christian services as a group of worshippers gathered in an arc around a
priest.

Bricks are usually laid in a regular pattern called a ‘bond’. In accepted
bricklaying practice, if you stand beneath a brick wall and look straight up,
the vertical edges of the bricks (the ‘perpends’) should line-up.
Traditionally, thin mortar joints are a sign of fine craft, with exceptionally
skilled bricklayers able to reduce the normal 10 millimetre joint to as little
as 3 millimetres. But the brickwork at St Peter’s overturns these
conventions. Here, bricks swim in a soup of thick mortar—walls are more
mortar than brick in places—and perpends rarely line up. Lewerentz
imagined the individual bricks to symbolize individual members of the
congregation, representing the body of the church, and he imagined them so
precious that he declared no bricks could be cut. It was this rule which
produced the unusual bricklaying logic, where mortar expands to fill spaces
left between uncut bricks. Lewerentz’s strange brickwork thus recalled the
first Roman concrete, where masonry served as aggregate in cement. It
appeared almost geological, like a natural formation, becoming what
Jeremy Till later called ‘the brickiest of bricks and the walliest of walls’.

Little was normal at St Peter’s. While there was scant attempt to be
fashionable, most aspects of the church’s construction were thought afresh.
Ordinary materials and details were reinvented in an attempt to imbue them
with meaning. Like other buildings claimed for an alternative tradition of

modern architecture in brick, the church didn’t do this by returning to local
architectures of the past, but instead by attempting to update traditional
elements in relation to current realities of industrialization and
globalization. St Peter’s thus stands as a powerfully idiosyncratic
illustration of the idea of another modern architecture: one imagined as an
ongoing process of reinvention; retrieving specificity, meaning, and place;
reclaiming history and monumentality.

Chapter 5
Light and air

Deep plans and networks

Brightly coloured 1950s American cars, dramatically styled with chrome
tailfins, provided a defining image of mid-20th-century modernity. Their
imagery seemed to associate modern technology with personal freedom and
decadence. The future they symbolized consigned the horse and cart—then
still a regular sight in the US and Europe—to the medieval past. Those
ridiculous, glorious tailfins were invented by Harley Earl from General
Motors (GM). And when GM sought an architect for its new 320-acre
research and design campus at Warren, Michigan, on the suburban fringes
of Detroit, USA, Earl helped them to choose Eero Saarinen.

GM’s campus (Figure 25) was built over eight years between 1948 and
1956, at an astonishing cost for that time of $60 million. Its modern
buildings tapped GM’s automotive technology, burnishing the futuristic
credentials of what was then America’s largest corporation. A central lake
was completed with artworks by modern sculptors Alexander Calder and
Antoine Pevsner (no relation to Nikolaus), topped with a 40-metre tall,
stainless-steel-finished water tower. Most striking was Saarinen’s Styling
Dome, steel clad like the cars, glinting in the sunlight like it’d landed from
one of America’s newly popular science-fiction (sci-fi) movies. Earl’s
aerodynamically styled cars were arranged in a circle under the dome’s

reflective ceiling, and its visitors must have felt they were standing at the
epicentre of the future.

25. General Motors (GM) research and design campus, Warren,
Michigan, USA, 1956. Its buildings tapped GM’s automotive
technology, burnishing the futuristic credentials of what was then
America’s largest corporation. A central lake was topped with a 40-
metre tall, stainless-steel-finished water tower. Prominent in this
photograph is the Styling Dome, glinting in the sunlight like it’s landed
from one of the newly popular science fiction movies. (Architect: Eero
Saarinen.)

The majority of buildings on GM’s campus reflected modernity less
sensationally. Echoing Mies’s IIT campus, most comprised low-lying,
pared-down, steel-framed boxes set in parkland, clad with curtain walls.
Those curtain walls were flatter than Mies’s, waterproofed with neoprene
strips invented for another of Earl’s styling innovations: the wraparound

windscreen. Less immediately noticeable was the novel servicing of the
GM buildings. Ceilings—like at the Technical Center Studios, 1953—told
the story (Figure 26). Set-out on a 5 foot 2 inch grid, their dimensions
coordinated the placement of every element from partitions and doors to the
facade glazing. Their regular grids brought together fluorescent tubes,
electrical outlets, fire sprinklers connected to a network of pipes, and air
supply and extraction via concealed ducts. Air-conditioning diffusers and
sprinkler heads were placed so that partitions could be arranged and
rearranged along the ceiling’s grid lines. Pipes and ducts ran through the
steel floor decks, with the finished ceilings hung below them as a separate
element.

26. Ceiling detail, Technical Center Studios, General Motors campus,
Warren, Michigan, USA, 1953. The ceiling grid coordinated the
placement of every element in the building, from partitions and doors
to the facade glazing. It contained fluorescent tubes, electrical outlets,
air supply, and air extract via concealed ducts, and fire sprinklers
connected to a hidden network of pipes. (Architect: Eero Saarinen.)

This ‘suspended ceiling’—designed by Saarinen’s office with GM
technicians, plus consultants Smith Hinchman & Grylls—indicated a fresh
organizing logic for moder architecture. Most buildings had previously
remained relatively narrow in plan—rarely more than 12 metres across—
because interior spaces had to be lit by the sun and ventilated using opening
windows. Air-conditioning and fluorescent tubes, however, allowed
satisfactory lighting and ventilation to be provided artificially rather than
naturally. Accommodation could thus be placed further from windows,
enabling buildings to become deeper in plan. This made buildings cheaper,
because the amount of external wall—the most expensive part—could be
reduced in relation to the overall floor area. Various office cells at GM, in
the 1951 Engineering Group Building for example, had no external
windows but were instead glazed boxes on internal corridors. The
suspended ceiling—which since became consolidated as a global standard
grid, familiar from countless offices, hospitals, and schools—stood for the
substitution of natural light and air with mechanical provision. Air-
conditioning and fluorescent light thus became combined to produce a
deep-plan architectural logic.

American engineer Willis Haviland Carrier is credited with combining
existing technologies to produce modern air-conditioning in the 1900s.
Scottish chemist Joseph Black had worked out, in 1760, that heat gets
absorbed when liquid evaporates into vapour, and released when vapour
condenses into liquid, but the consequences were only later exploited. By
the mid-19th century, American trade in ice—shipped south from northern
climes for a range of uses from medical treatments to refrigerating ships’
cargoes—grew so profitable that inventors started experimenting with
turning water into ice mechanically using chemical refrigerants.
Simultaneously, experiments were being undertaken in theatres to circulate
ice- or water-cooled air—or to draw cool air from underground chambers—
to reduce overheating in summer, although these were mostly ineffective or
produced very humid environments. Carrier worked out that air temperature
could be controlled by adjusting moisture levels: drawing air through a
spray of cooled or heated vapour, supplied by coils filled with hot or cold
water. He used historical weather records to calibrate temperature and
moisture levels in order to mitigate excessive humidity. The resulting air-
conditioning was initially used in factory spaces processing delicate

materials, like celluloid film and pharmaceutical capsules. The first fully
air-conditioned building was completed in 1929: the Milam Building in San
Antonio, Texas, USA, where a network of ducts hung in corridors
introduced cooled or warmed air into offices.

The earliest artificial lighting systems, meanwhile, burned coal gas. Gas
light infrastructure became widespread in European and American cities
during the late 19th century. In the 1870s, however, American engineer
Charles Francis Brush developed one of the first viable systems for electric
rather than gas light, connecting a steam-powered dynamo to arc lamps
with copper cables. A major development was the invention and
improvement of incandescent lightbulbs in the 1890s, in different forms by
Thomas Edison and Joseph Swan. As power stations and electric supply
networks became constructed in cities during the early 20th century (Milan
was an early adopter), electric lighting overtook gas.

The precursor of modern fluorescent lighting was developed by American
engineer D. McFarlan Moore, who invented an electric-powered, gas-filled,
tube lamp. Different gases were tried over some forty years to produce the
best illumination. Georges Claude tried neon gas in the 1910s and, although
the orange light it emitted was unsuitable for lighting rooms, it made
striking illuminated signs when filled into glass tubes and twisted into
letters and shapes. Neon thus became a symbol of modernity and
contributed to the image of International Style buildings. The 1939 New
York World’s Fair spurred two American companies, General Electric and
Sylvania, to produce white, low voltage, fluorescent lamps. These proved
phenomenally successful, shipping large volumes in the US after the
Second World War. Four-fifths of the power of incandescent bulbs went to
heat at that time, and only a fifth to light, with bulbs producing around 40
per cent of the cooling demand in the first air-conditioned buildings. So,
fluorescent light, producing significantly less heat, became an obvious
partner for air-conditioning.

By the 1950s, ‘air-con’ became widespread in America, not just in factories
but also in theatres, offices, and rail cars, and fluorescent lighting also grew
more widely employed. GM’s campus illustrated an early example of their

integration, combined into those highly serviced ceilings which made deep-
plan buildings conceivable.

GM’s campus also illustrated the translation of ideas about highly
supervised, statistically analysed, mass production—like at Ford’s Highland
Park—from factories into offices. (Indeed, Saarinen’s architect father, Eliel,
knew Albert Kahn.) Deep-plan floorplates transformed office work and
workplaces. Single cell offices became highly glazed, and so-called open-
plan layouts were tested, arranging fields of desks and low partitions across
whole floors. These ‘office landscapes’ allowed workers to be readily
overseen, permitting the perpetual reorganization of people and furniture to
suit changing management dynamics.

GM’s campus was one of the first out-of-town office parks, and it illustrated
changing postwar relations between home and work. The lakeside
landscape was designed for viewing from a moving car, and managers
assumed that employees would drive to work. The site was imagined as a
gated compound on the edge of the city, connected by highway networks to
workers’ detached suburban houses. Due to employers like GM, Detroit
became, over subsequent decades, a prime example of the movement of
office work to out-of-town sites, accompanied by the movement of middle-
class housing to suburbs, and shopping to roadside strip malls. Such
changes transformed historic city centres in the US, some of which emptied
out, leaving dereliction and poverty behind. Thus, GM’s campus illustrates
broader postwar shifts—found in varying degrees in different Western
cultures—away from a traditional idea of civic life conducted in the streets
and squares of the city towards a new preference for the private realms of
office, car, home, and TV.

GM’s campus also anticipated the idea of a network society. Its office
workers were mostly distributed across open-plan offices, their desk layouts
reflecting the network diagrams of management structures. Complex
patterns of pipes, ducts, and wires embedded in the ceilings echoed
complex urban networks of power and water supply. Moreover, the campus
relied on its adjacent highway network, supplying goods and workers. Not
long after GM’s campus, Saarinen’s office designed headquarters for IBM

computers and Bell Telephone along similar lines. It’s no coincidence that
IBM’s pioneering computing, soon imagined in terms of networked
computers, was developed under Saarinen’s networked ceilings, echoing
networked urban infrastructures.

Historian Reinhold Martin has argued that these projects were connected
directly into Cold War politics via ‘systems thinking’, which understood
everything in the world as complex, interconnected, mathematically model-
able systems. Martin noted the postwar Western alliance of new military
technologies with commercial industrial expertise—sometimes called the
‘military-industrial complex’—linking corporations with states and their
armies, automotive with aeronautical design, and computing with
innovations in warfare. Martin argued that the GM campus—alongside
Saarinen’s headquarters for IBM and Bell—stood for the global power of
this ‘military-industrial complex’. He illustrated the point by referring to the
opening ceremony for the GM campus in 1956, dubbed ‘the Versailles of
Technology’ by Life magazine after the famous French royal gardens,
attended by GM’s executives and their guests including senior US military
officers and the president of Indonesia, addressed live from the White
House by US president, Dwight D. Eisenhower. The so-called ‘military-
industrial complex’, arguably represented by GM (who opened a Defense
Division in 1950), was criticized because it profited from warfare and thus
appeared perversely incentivized to promote conflict to sell technology. It
was also hugely inventive, directly or indirectly spawning technologies for
space travel, the microprocessor, and the networking of computers into the
World Wide Web.

Test-piloting Bucky’s domes

While the postwar years saw a new deep-plan architectural logic emerge
from air-conditioning and artificial lighting, it had already become accepted
that modern buildings should look light and airy. This imagery was helped
by new glass technology which enabled the fabrication of bigger panes: so-
called ‘float glass’, formed into continuous sheets by rolling hot liquid glass
onto molten tin. Glass never produced its own architectural logic like steel
and reinforced concrete had, despite experiments to design structural glass
beams and columns. However, float glass did help modern architects

including Mies and Corbusier to devise an imagery of lightness and
airiness, and those terms became widespread in accounts of modern
buildings.

This book’s fourth superhero of modern architecture was the most
celebrated champion of lightness in architecture: inventor, author, and
‘futurologist’ Richard Buckminster Fuller (1895-1983). Nicknamed
‘Bucky’ by fans, he was famous for delivering complex, charismatic
lectures at manic speed. Born into an aristocratic Massachusetts family on
America’s East Coast, he became a curious blend of geek and travelling
salesman, traversing the world with suitcases full of models illustrating his
latest ideas. Fuller lived his life as a scientific experiment, testing all sorts
of speculations, philosophies, and diets on himself—often at the expense of
his long-suffering family—recording the details with astonishing
comprehensiveness in a diary he named, grandly, the Dymaxion Chronofile.

Fuller was credited as a pioneer of sustainability, concerned with
humanity’s lasting impact on the planet, and its mitigation through
technological invention. He’s been depicted as a proto-Hippie, anticipating
that 1960s counter-culture through his mystical ideas about destiny,
‘synergistic’ understanding between people, and unseen connections
inherent in ‘Universe’—which he wrote with a capital ‘U’ and without
‘the’, to emphasize its all-encompassing unity. Fuller talked about ‘pattern
integrities’, phenomena evident in Universe waiting to be discovered. His
example was a knot: people usually think of knots in terms of ropes, or
nylon as a material, however the knot is none of those things but instead an
idea that becomes form: a pattern integrity. This thinking underpinned
Fuller’s idealistic designs, including a three-wheeled car, future-proofed so
it could later fly, 1933; a moulded copper bathroom, 1936; and a striking
‘One-Ocean World’ map, 1943, formulated for global citizens to design
connected systems. While Fuller didn’t like architects, they admired his
designs for prefabricated houses—including the 4D (or Dymaxion) House,
1928-9; and Dymaxion Deployment Unit, 1940—plus an improbably
lightweight structural system he invented called Tensegrity, 1948, and
super-light ‘geodesic’ domes, 1949.

Various modern architects, like Saarinen, were entranced by possibilities for
factory production, and so-called technology-transfer from the automobile
industry, fantasizing about mass-producing ‘prefabricated’ houses ready for
delivery to site. Fuller’s Dymaxion House fulfilled these fantasies. As
historian Mark Wigley has noted, Fuller became frustrated by the
wastefulness of houses in relation to the ‘magical efficiency’ of new
technologies like cars and radios. In response, Fuller argued in 1929 that
houses should: eliminate domestic work, exploitation, selfishness, and
centralized control; safeguard against flood, storms, fire, earthquakes,
hurricanes, and marauders; and save time for education, amusement, and
advancement. He invented the term Dymaxion—which he applied to
various inventions—for publicity purposes, emphasizing futuristic-
sounding words, combining ‘dynamic’ and ‘maximum’ with the scientific

6 d

lon’.

Fuller’s proposed Dymaxion House, presented in striking drawings and
models in 1928-9, was to be factory made and delivered by airship.
Dramatically, the airship would drop a bomb to form a crater in the ground.
The house—centred on a mast containing staircase, lift, and electrical and
mechanical services—would then be lowered into the hole, like planting a
tree, and concreted-in, with tension wires added to secure it. Driven by solar
and wind power—also recycling rainwater, and packaging solid waste for
reprocessing—the house could exist off-grid in remote areas, or indeed in
cities, ready for immediate inhabitation.

Fuller’s house anticipated numerous future technologies, several
commercialized only later in the century, and numerous components were
thought afresh. Many innovations made novel use of air-conditioning,
provided to remove smells and dust, and also to pressurize air for other
uses. The structure was designed as a lightweight aluminium frame set out
on a triangular grid, infilled with translucent vacuum-sealed panels and
fitted with springy inflatable floors. Pneumatic silk partitions and doors
were accompanied by plug-in vacuum hoses and inflatable fumiture whose
firmness could be controlled by the users. The ceiling was conceived as a
continuous surface admitting diffuse light, with vents to control
temperature. Furniture would be suspended from this ceiling, including
glass tables on neon-lit cables. Storage would be provided in revolving

units. Triangular curtains, fitting the structural module, would pull out of
the floor or drop from the ceiling. A moulded bathroom unit, in the mast,
would wash people instantly with an atomized spray. A utility space, which
Fuller dubbed the ‘catch-up-with-life room’, would clean and dry clothes
within minutes. A ‘go-ahead-with-life room’ would contain a radio,
television (barely viable technology at the time), maps, globes, revolving
book shelves, a drawing board, typewriter, and various learning materials.
Fuller imagined residents of Dymaxion Houses as planetary citizens
liberated from domestic drudge by technology, freed up to dream and invent
as active contributors to ‘Spaceship Earth’ (a term he coined later, in 1951).

Fuller claimed that the Dymaxion House could be produced by an
automobile company and cost as little as a car. Like the cars and personal
aeroplanes shown parked beneath it in drawings, he envisaged that it could
be easily moved. When residents wanted to relocate, they could take their
house with them. Fuller never saw a Dymaxion House built at full size—
blaming the entrenched interests of the architectural establishment for
opposing mass production—but his models inspired diverse imagery in
architecture, art, fiction, and film, including interiors in sci-fi movies as
diverse as (the hugely sexist) Barbarella, 1968, and Star Wars, 1977.

Life under a dome

While Fuller never saw a Dymaxion House built, deployable shelters were
constructed to his designs for US military use during the Cold War. One
memorable image shows a lightweight dome suspended from a helicopter
with a single cable. That dome was part of a twenty-year research project
conducted with students whom Fuller taught as visiting professor at a
sequence of universities.

These ‘geodesic domes’ were highly efficient spheres—or, more usually,
part-spheres—inspired by bugs’ eyes and spiders’ webs, made from slender
structural elements arranged in triangles. Developed through a mix of
complex mathematics and trial and error, they employed the least material
possible, arranged in the most efficient way, to transmit loads to the ground.
Geodesic domes seemed impossibly light and strong. An image of the

second prototype—made by students at Black Mountain College, North
Carolina in 1949—shows people hanging improbably off a lightweight
frame (Figure 27).

27. Geodesic dome prototype, Black Mountain College, USA, 1949.
Geodesic domes were inspired by bugs’ eyes and spiders’ webs, made
from slender structural elements arranged in triangles employing the
least material possible, in the most efficient way, to transmit loads to
the ground. Students hang improbably from this prototype which they
had constructed. (Designer: Buckminster Fuller.)

Fuller led the construction of prototype domes at Montreal, Canada, in
1951, North Carolina State College, 1952, and the University of Oregon,

1953, before the awarding of a patent in 1954. He had domestic
applications in mind, making a detailed model of what he called the
Skybreak House in 1952. This showed a bubble-like alloy dome, lifted on
stilts, finished with a lightweight transparent insulating plastic skin.
Fumiture would be arranged on a platform at the base of the dome and only
the most private functions would be separated out into enclosed boxes.
Fuller enthused that transparent domes like this would dissolve the
traditional idea of the house, likening them to living under the sky. Wall and
roof, here, were to be combined into an almost-invisible layer of high
performance plastic. While no such plastic was viable at that time, Fuller
and his student collaborators tested several innovative materials including
Mylar, receiving free samples from DuPont and other corporations.

Most of the geodesic domes realized were commissioned by the US
military. In 1949, Fuller installed a prototype at The Pentagon, Washington,
DC—headquarters of the US Department of Defense—for use in conflicts
and disaster-relief. Another dome—a lightweight timber lattice covered in
chicken wire, with a sprayed-on neoprene rubber skin, built by North
Carolina State University students—was the one that was test-lifted by a US
Marines helicopter in 1951. The experiment was deemed a success, and
lightweight magnesium-framed domes were then commissioned from
Fuller’s company, Geodesics Inc., for military applications. In 1955, a dome
made in fibreglass was tested on the roof of the Lincoln Laboratory at MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, to cover an experimental radar installation,
proving invisible to the radar, and surviving a hurricane shortly afterwards.
Wise to a marketing opportunity, Fuller branded this variant the ‘Radome’,
photographing workers balancing its triangular components on their
fingertips to illustrate their lightness and strength. When a line of sixty-
three radar stations was constructed in 1957 at the frozen extremity of the
Americas to provide early warning of Soviet invasion, from Alaska to
Baffin Island, they were covered with ‘Bucky Domes’. As Wigley
remarked, the geodesic dome ‘no longer simply defined just ... domestic
shelter’, it defined ‘domestic security for an entire continent’.

Fuller spent a lifetime fascinated by experimental materials, excited by
futuristic imagery, imagining buildings made for delivery by airship and
helicopter. He challenged assumptions that architecture should be

heavyweight, fixed, and expensive. Visiting a building designed by British
architects Norman and Wendy Foster in 1978, he enquired memorably:
‘How much does your building weigh?’ Fuller implied: why shouldn’t
buildings be cheap and portable? Why shouldn’t they provide technological
liberations like those offered by cars and televisions? His structures went
beyond the idea that modern architecture ought simply to look light and airy
to realizing highly lightweight, almost transparent structures. Indeed, his
anti-architectural, anti-establishment thinking inspired a diverse group of
architects, critics, engineers, and ‘drop outs’ in the 1960s and 1970s.

Bubbles and blimps

Fuller’s geodesics proposed stripping architecture back to basic human
shelter. In a 1960 book, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age,
Banham (again) argued that form never really did follow function in
‘International Style’ modernism. Its buildings offered superficial images of
modernity, he argued, but didn’t tap the full potential of new technologies.
In the spirit of Fuller, and Mies’s dictum that ‘less is more’, Banham argued
that mechanical and electrical services—artificial lighting, air-conditioning,
and power supply—represented the basic components of shelter, ideally
supplemented only by the most minimal of enclosures.

A 1965 article by Banham in the magazine Art in America was illustrated
by artist Francois Dallegret. Together, they proposed ‘The Unhouse’.
Dallegret’s section depicted a double-skinned, inflated transparent plastic
bubble on a plinth, showing a group of greyed-out naked Banhams and
Dallegrets collaged around a central technological ‘totem-pole’. That totem
held lamps, a TV screen, stereo speakers, fridge, cooker, and air supply.
Meanwhile, the architecture became reduced to two thin lines representing
plastic membranes. The proposal was inspired by technologies then being
developed for early space exploration, for the artificial environmental
bubbles of rocket ships and space suits. Banham and Dallegret described
the Unhouse as a ‘living package’ that would do away with the weighty
encumbrances of buildings, and their associated social and cultural
baggage, indicating new ways of life. The naked figures in the drawing
referred to the 1960s idea of sexual liberation, supposedly occasioned by
the newly invented female contraceptive pill. They also referred to

‘primitive man’ [sic], proposing a return to an idea about architecture’s
ancient origins: a circle of people gathered around a fire, as described in the
oldest surviving architecture book—Vitruvius’ De Architectura, 1st century
CE.

Several designers explored this reduction of architecture to clear, inflated
plastic membranes. Examples included: Michael Webb’s experimental
‘Cushicle’ bubble, and his plastic ‘Suitaloon’ fitted to the human body,
1967; Haus-Rucker-Co’s (self-explanatory) ‘Balloon for Two’, also 1967;
‘Mobile Office’, an inflated drum where the architect Hans Hollein sat at a
drawing board, 1969; Ant Farm’s ‘Clean Air Pod’, 1970; and the ‘Restless
Sphere’ that the Austrian collective Co-op Himmelb(])au rolled around the
streets of Basel, Switzerland, 1971. In such projects, membranes became
second skins for human figures, whose blurry contours appeared through
their surface reflections. These architects took lightness and airiness to an
extreme at a time when Tange and Safdie were simultaneously designing
heavyweight megastructures, and Kahn was seeking a new monumentality
for modern architecture. In contrast, their anti-monumental projects
questioned whether architecture should involve buildings at all. These
inflatable fantasies deliberately challenged architecture’s traditional
associations with permanence. But their designers also diverged somewhat
from Banham and Dallegret’s vision of the Unhouse: they understood their
bubbles not as an extension of total environmental control—as proposed by
Banham, and as embodied in Saarinen’s GM campus where fluorescent
lighting and air-conditioning substituted for natural light and air—but
instead as a parody of total environmental control. The inhabitants of these
bubbles were not imagined as enclosed by technology, so much as
imprisoned by it.

A spirit of satire informed these young architects’ work, partly in response
to the counter-culture of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Various anti-
establishment movements first flourished across Europe and the US in
association with the coming-of-age of the postwar ‘baby boomers’. They
played to the soundtrack of the Beatles and Rolling Stones, relaxed with
(what Banham called) ‘wonder-drugs and new domestic chemistries’,
championed equal rights for all genders and ethnicities, and looked up to a
new creative class of celebrities, artists, and designers. ‘Hippie’

incarnations of these movements in the late 1960s reacted specifically
against the Vietnam War and the draft of young Americans to fight. Their
thinking endorsed a new environmentalism—as highlighted by Fuller—
acutely aware of the fragility of planet Earth and the destruction of life by
human activity. Student groups associated with the counter-culture were
highly political, imagining mainstream figures—including their teachers—
as a complacent, reactionary establishment. Their frustrations boiled over
into demonstrations in 1968—in Paris, New York, Prague, and West Berlin,
for example—challenging what they saw as the imperial ambitions of
warmongering anti-democratic regimes, championing instead freedom and
civil rights. These demonstrations—some violently suppressed—didn’t
represent a coherent global movement, but they did connect local, national,
and international concerns with wider protest and trade union groups.

Some radicals decided to ‘drop out’ of mainstream society, to reject the
establishment and money culture, collecting together to live communal
subsistence lives. In 1965, four art students—styled as Curly, Jo, Lard, and
Clard—founded a commune in remote southeast Colorado, USA, self-
building geodesic domes out of recycled components like car parts. Another
group—Ant Farm, whose chief protagonists were architects Chip Lord and
Doug Michaels—began building a so-called nomadic environment in Death
Valley, California, with domes and inflatables, working with the writer
Stewart Brand. Brand’s Whole Earth Catalog, several editions of which
were published between 1968 and 1971, mixed articles about self-
sufficiency, ecology, and radical education with reviews of building
products and DIY (do-it-yourself) tips. It provided a ‘how-to’ guide for
alternative living. Steve Jobs—who founded the Homebrew Computer Club
in California before founding Apple Computers—later described it as ‘like
Google in paperback form, 35 years before Google’. Jobs highlighted that,
while communes never became mainstream, they incubated ideas about
sharing and information economies that later informed the emerging
Internet.

Mainstream postwar modern architecture gradually became seen as part of
the establishment problem. It got associated with top-down comprehensive
redevelopment involving the clearance of settled communities—for
example, the imposition of housing and office blocks constructed in the

West in the 1960s on the lines of Corbusier’s Ville Contemporaine—driven
by local and national authorities. This growing perception was strengthened
by author, activist, and sociologist Jane Jacobs’s 1961 book Death and Life
of Great American Cities. Jacobs studied lively traditional neighbourhoods
with strong communities and a vibrant street life, including Boston’s North
End, then slated to be cleared, showing how they figured better in health,
crime, and education measures than replacement modern neighbourhoods.
Such perceived failures of modern architecture became symbolized by the
demolition of the troubled Pruitt-I[goe housing blocks in St Louis, Missouri,
USA, in 1972. Memorable images of their demolition illustrated a growing
disillusionment with modern architecture, which became perceived as an
accessory of top-down control. The bubbles of Banham, Co-op
Himmelb())au, Drop City, and others can be understood in this context as a
rejection of centralized planning and industrial construction; conceived
instead as recovering the supposed early promise of modern architecture to
express Straightforwardly new technologies and new social configurations.

Rightly or wrongly, the fantastical drawings of the Archigram group
became seen as defining images of 1960s counter-culture. Archigram began
as a group of British students and architects comprising Michael Webb
(whose Cushicle and Suitaloon have been mentioned earlier), Warren
Chalk, Peter Cook, Dennis Crompton, David Greene, and Ron Herron. The
name ‘Archigram’ combined ‘architecture’ with ‘telegram’, then the fastest
means of global communication (a kind of text message sent from post
offices). They used the same name for an anti-architecture fanzine they
published on a shoestring budget, containing memorable images that
mashed-up clip-outs from advertising and film posters with sci-fi comic
imagery and straight-laced technical drawing. Historian Simon Sadler has
shown how these drawings blended humour with seriousness, experimental
fantasies with plausible technological predictions, techno-gadgetry with
ideas about disposableness, and 1960s radical politics with the macho
derring-do of boys’ comics.

Herron’s drawing for ‘Walking City’, 1964, proposed giant insect-inspired
megastructures on eight legs: alternative communities made of
prefabricated modules that could stride across the landscape. Dennis
Crompton’s ‘Computor City’ drawings, 1964, showed an abstract grid of

dwellings looking like substations and diodes, plugged-in with pipes and
cables, expressing the idea of the city as a connected network. Most
memorable was Peter Cook’s cartoon strip proposing an ‘Instant City’,
1969. Emblazoned with slogans, the images illustrated successive stages for
the take over of a ‘sleeping’ small town. First, an airship would arrive and
get plugged in. Then it would lower tents and billboards to provoke
spontaneous events, enlivening the town’s spaces (Figure 28). ‘Square
becomes theatre’, the drawing proclaims, ‘yard about to become disco-
talkpit’, and the blimp drops projection screens. After a period of ‘high
intensity’, the airship would move on, leaving a town infiltrated with
‘learning stations’ and ‘infocentre’ technology. Ongoing ‘counter-action’
would then be inspired among empowered young people, the Instant City
network having taken over.

28. Instant City Airships, 1969. Stage three of a sequence showing the
effect on a typical English town. ‘Square becomes theatre’, ‘yard about
to become disco-talkpit’, and the blimp drops projection screens. After
a period of ‘high intensity’, the airship moves on, leaving behind
ongoing ‘counter-action’ inspired by empowered young people.
(Drawing: Peter Cook and Archigram.)

Archigram’s drawings followed Fuller’s lead in claiming a spontaneous,
playful, and disposable architecture. They conceived architecture as short-
term rather than long-term, as the design of transient events rather than
fixed structures. Indeed, the combination of technology, culture, and
democracy they illustrated resonated afresh with a later generation
grappling with how to imagine the newly popularized Internet in the 2000s.

Skin and guts

The closest anyone got to building Instant City, or something like it, was in
Paris’s Marais district. A competition, held in 1971, sought architects for a

gallery, library, and contemporary music labs. The jury—chaired by Jean
Prouvé, an engineer famous for demountable structures—chose a design
from a then-obscure duo: Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers, working with
engineers Ove Arup & Partners. In the spirit of the 1968 protests, Piano and
Rogers proposed an anti-institutional institution. The building that finally
opened in 1978—named Centre Georges Pompidou after the French
president who championed it, and often called Beaubourg after its site—
contained all the contradictions you might expect of an expensive,
permanent, state-sponsored institution trying to seem temporary,
spontaneous, and radical.

Beaubourg brought together the deep-plan logic of air-conditioning and
fluorescent lighting with ideas of spontaneity evoked by Archigram’s
bubbles and blimps. It comprised a substantial steel frame, supporting
broad, highly serviced free-plan floorplates without intermediate columns.
These floorplates, it was imagined, would provide maximum flexibility for
radical curators to stage events: combining painting and sculpture with
video and sound art, for example, or altogether new art forms. It was
originally proposed that floor segments should move up and down for extra
flexibility, although this was later abandoned because of cost, along with
digital billboards proposed for the facades. Escalators were threaded
through the structural frame in glazed tubes on one facade, facing a new
public square, offering striking views over Paris, and symbolizing
dynamism and spontaneity. The primary street facade, meanwhile,
comprised a web of brightly coloured pipes and ducts, feeding service voids
in the suspended ceilings and raised floors behind (Figure 29). Putting the
ducts on the outside helped keep the floorplates free of disruptive service
zones. But it also conferred the building a radically novel image—a
dramatized expression of structure and servicing technology—which
historians subsequently categorized as its own architectural style: ‘high-
tech’.

"ee - > -

29. Pompidou Centre, Beaubourg, Paris, France, 1978, The street
facade comprises a web of brightly coloured pipes and ducts, set in the
structural frame, feeding service voids in the suspended ceilings and
raised floors behind. Putting the ducts on the outside helped keep the
huge floorplates free of disruptive service zones, expressing structure
and servicing technology dramatically. Historians dubbed this
architectural imagery ‘high-tech’. (Architects: Renzo Piano and
Richard Rogers.)

Beaubourg’s attempts to express informality and spontaneity weren’t so
original, drawing from: Banham’s idea of architecture as a serviced
container; Archigram’s imagery; the 19th-century engineering of Paxton

and Eiffel; and a 1960s proposal for a flexible ‘Fun Palace’ in London,
imagined by theatre director Joan Littlewood with architect Cedric Price. It
was distinguished from comparable proposals, however, by the fact of
getting built, albeit with compromises: the escalator tubes later became
privatized, incorporated into the paid-for gallery ‘experience’ rather than
free to the public, and curators later built permanent rooms on certain
floorplates to save the cost of refitting them for every exhibition.

When it was finished, Beaubourg was as unpopular with the Parisian elite
as Eiffel’s tower had been a century before. The philosopher Jean
Baudrillard thought it illustrated: ‘the image of a culture flattened by its
own weight’, ‘generated ... by logicians of the establishment wholly
lacking in critical spirit’. Beaubourg sold out its radical potential, he
believed, by freezing promises of dynamism and spontaneity into a fixed
institution. Moreover—with unashamed elitism—Baudrillard criticized
Beaubourg as being a machine to mass produce art for the masses. He
abhorred how its imagery—expressing the guts of its building services—
honoured mass production more than it honoured the cultures of artistic
craft. To Baudrillard, Beaubourg rejected the idea of artistic endeavour as
the pinnacle of human thought and civilization—which he thought a
cultural building should celebrate—standing instead for banal industrial
modernity.

Before partnering with Piano, Richard Rogers—and Su Rogers—had
worked with fellow British architects Norman and Wendy Foster. The
Fosters, practising as Foster Associates, completed another art gallery—the
Sainsbury Centre, at the University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK—in 1978.
At first glance, it looked like the no-nonsense steel roadside sheds familiar
across America or Europe. ‘Ugly ordinary’ roadside buildings had been
celebrated in Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Stephen Izenour’s
1971 book Learning from Las Vegas. But the Sainsbury Centre became a
refined, exaggerated version of those everyday sheds, sited on a rise in the
landscape like an ancient temple (Figure 30).

30. Sainsbury Centre, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK, 1978.
A double-skin ‘space frame’ containing structure, services, and
secondary rooms was lined inside and out with bespoke engineered
panels—louvered, glazed, and ribbed aluminium-covered—sealed with
neoprene gaskets to produce a sleek skin. The shed’s ends—equally
sleek glass walls, supported on glass fins—are over-sailed by the space
frame to form porticoes. (Architects: Foster Associates.)

It had a so-called ‘space frame’ structure—inspired by Fuller’s geodesics,
made of slender steel tubes formed into interlocking triangles—concealed
in wide double skins. These double skins contained substantial spaces for
structure, services, and maintenance gantries, and even secondary rooms
like WCs and storerooms. Between the two double skins was a vast room
for exhibitions without any intermediate columns, 30 metres wide, 7.5
metres high and 130 metres long. Two mezzanine levels for the university’s
fine artists, plus a basement for delivery, workshop and conservation areas,

freed up this single volume to contain only mobile screens and vitrines for
artworks. The double skins were lined inside and out with a mixture of
bespoke engineered panels—ribbed, aluminium-covered, louvred, and
glazed—sealed with neoprene gaskets to produce a sleek surface. In theory,
those panels, each fixed with only six bolts, could be reconfigured to suit
changes in interior layout. The shed’s short ends, meanwhile, comprised
equally sleek glass walls, supported on glass fins, over-sailed by the space
frame to form porticoes overlooking the landscape.

Beaubourg and the Sainsbury Centre were both conceived as highly
serviced containers of art. But their architectural imagery diverged. The first
expressed the guts of its structure and servicing—beams, pipes, ducts, and
lifts—while the second concealed the same servicing inside a sleek double
skin, revealing it only in tantalizing glimpses through glazed panels. Both
sought an imagery of light and air. Both highlighted the complex structure
and servicing required to build sports-hall-like spaces for art. Both traded
on the rhetoric of flexibility and spontaneity. However—as illustrated by
the permanent rooms retrofitted to Beaubourg’s floorplates, and
reconfigurable panels at the Sainsbury Centre that were never reconfigured
—both also overstated their flexibility. These ‘high-tech’ buildings were set
apart from Saarinen’s GM campus and Fuller’s geodesics by their visual
exaggeration of their technological credentials—illustrated by technicolour
ducts and a double skin containing significantly more space than strictly
necessary.

Previous modern buildings I’ve discussed in this book questioned the merits
of architectural decoration, understood by their architects as arbitrary,
unnecessary, and morally wrong. But Beaubourg and the Sainsbury Centre,
by contrast, renewed concern for amplified imagery. They moved beyond
ideas about deriving plan form, for example, and the placement of
windows, straightforwardly from functional necessities. They didn’t only
express technology, they ‘fetishized’ it (as critics said at the time).
Beaubourg’s web of ducts became a kind of ornamentation. As did the sleek
surfaces of the Sainsbury Centre, artfully caricaturing ordinary roadside
sheds, and expensively reinventing typical components. Both buildings took
the expression of technology beyond, say, E.1027 or Seagram, and beyond
the rhetoric of functional logic. Previous modern buildings emphasized

technology visually, where Beaubourg and Sainsbury artfully exaggerated
it, engaging in technologically inspired embellishment.

This distinction is subtle but important. It shows how Beaubourg and
Sainsbury extended the functional ethos of modern design but also went
beyond it. Arguably, these buildings rejected Ruskin’s insistence on truth to
materials by accentuating functional necessities for visual effect, flouting
Loos’s insistence that ‘ornament is a crime’ and Mies’s dictum that ‘less is
more’.

These buildings’ complex imagery reflected the growing complexities of
the time. The 1973 Energy Crisis—when Middle Eastern oil companies
refused to supply fuel to certain Western countries because of a war with
Israel—highlighted connections between burgeoning oil consumption,
global politics, and ecological concerns. The crisis highlighted the fragility
of energy supply at a time when its reliability had become taken for granted.
It renewed postwar apprehensions about the value of technology for society.
And it coincided with a prolonged economic downturn causing the decline
of established industries, and communities around them, in the West.
Meanwhile, the Cold War threat of imminent nuclear destruction persisted.

A growing popular sense emerged that the modern promise of perpetual
progress—linking technology and democracy with ever-increasing living
standards—had halted. Art, literature, and film increasingly reflected this
emerging scepticism. Meanwhile, prominent philosophers and cultural
theorists challenged the fundamental basis of scientific and technological
thinking. They illustrated how the supposedly objective realities, and
absolute truths, of science and technology conveniently reflected the values
of a prosperous, white, Western, male elite, Feminism, civil rights,
ecological activism, and studies of global power (‘postcolonialism’)
highlighted links between global finance, political authority, and the
priorities of industry and military technologies, questioning the motivations
of the powerful global technocratic establishment. It’s now widely assumed
that modernity came to an end in the 1980s and 1990s because of this
growing loss of faith in the ideas of progress and technology, highlighting
the increasingly complicated problems of so-called developed societies.

These complexities can be seen reflected in the subtle, if fundamental, shift
from modern architectures which expressed technology to those like
Beaubourg and Sainsbury which heightened it.

Beaubourg and Sainsbury were transitional. They remained statements of
faith in the social promise of technology. But, as philosopher Walter
Benjamin reflected, every age dreams its successor, and their ‘high-tech’
imagery also anticipated the so-called postmodem architecture of the 1980s,
which rejected modern moralizing about honest architectural expression,
and re-embraced heightened imagery. While the underlying structural logic
of postmodern buildings usually remained straightforwardly modem, their
surfaces became ornamented with decoration derived from architectural
history, swooping or jagged ‘deconstructed’ forms or, indeed, high-tech
motifs. Thus, Beaubourg and Sainsbury stand both for late modernity and
the emergence of what followed. They conclude this story about modern
architecture. However, they could equally begin another story about
postmodern architecture.

Chapter 6

Conclusion

Bessemer steel, Portland cement, concrete reinforcement, and electric light
—all key technical ingredients of architectural modernity—were products
of the 19th century. The distinctive architectural moralities concerning
‘truth’ to materials and functions, which became associated with them, were
also consolidated in the 19th century, deriving from the theories of Ruskin,
Semper, Viollet-le-Duc, and others. Their future combination into what later
became recognized as modern architecture was not obvious at the time. It
looked inevitable only in retrospect, when historians like Russell-
Hitchcock, Pevsner, and Banham—with their own agendas—arranged
buildings and ideas into coherent stories. It took until the first half of the
20th century for architects to mature their ideas, in conjunction with new
materials, into the distinctive imagery that’s now recognized as modern
architecture. But that imagery was only the outward sign of new ways of
organizing structure, space, and surface: integrating architecture with
services; exploring novel logics of frames and planes; and testing free- and
open-plans.

Modem architects only gradually learnt to talk about their designs in
today’s familiar terms, emphasizing function, simplicity, order, space, place,
light, and air. That emerging vocabulary didn’t encourage them to discuss
what their buildings looked like. Nor did it help them to acknowledge their
intertextual references to art, engineering, or industrial design. Instead, most
modern architects promoted the myth that their buildings’ appearance was

merely a consequence of functional planning, and the organizational logics
inherent in the materials they employed.

Many postmodern architects, however, remembered that—just like the Iron
Bridge was shaped as an arch because that’s what bridges were expected to
look like—people maintained deep-seated preferences about how buildings
should appear. Despite efforts, by Mies for example, to design definitive
modern college and office buildings, most people’s preferred architectural
imagery remained premodern, and specific to familiar cultures. According
to postmodern theorists, notably Léon Krier, these preferences were related
to particular building types, like houses, schools, or hospitals. For example,
in Britain, the lasting popular image of the house seems to have remained in
brick or stone, with a pitched roof and pretty decorative porch. In West
German cities, the image of home remains flats in courtyard blocks, with
their particular pattern of communal living. It seemed that people were most
comfortable with the imagery of modern architecture only in building types
most closely associated with modern technologies, like railway stations, car
parks, and motorway service areas. In the 1980s, this thinking chimed with
ideas from the study of language, from ‘semiotics’, which examined how
the word-labels attached to things remain separate from the things
themselves. Why do we call a tree a tree, semioticians asked (or an arbol or
a $f), and not a kudfgaefjkd? Similarly, postmodern architects speculated
about the appearance of architecture in terms of visual languages. What, for
example, makes a mosque look like a mosque and not a garage?

Some modem architects—such as Aalto, Carlo Scarpa, or George Pace—
abstracted traditional architectural forms to produce modem ones which
nevertheless seemed familiar, making intertextual references to older
architectures. But postmodern architects instead frequently covered their
buildings with facades that pasted in traditional ‘signifying’ forms. For
example, big urban buildings like shopping malls were frequently collaged
with a variety of historic (or historic-ish) elevations to make them look like
traditional city blocks comprising multiple buildings. Modern architects
would have dismissed this as inauthentic, concealing the inherent logic of
the building and its materials. The engineering behind postmodern facades
like these usually remained stubbornly modern, however, comprising steel
and concrete frames optimized to suit the building’s functions. In numerous

examples like this, ghosts of modern architecture—in the traces of modern
ideas and organizational logics—have remained tenaciously persistent.

Ghosts of modern architecture

The current strand of expert architectural practice which subscribes most
closely to modern values is digital design, often called ‘parametricism’
because it sometimes employs computer modelling to test design
parameters. Its architects continue to pursue new technologies towards
distinctive imagery, but they work with technologies of design process more
than novel materials. Innovative software allows such architects to model
extraordinarily elaborate shapes. In parallel, experimental manufacturing
has transformed the fantasy of mass production into a new fantasy of ‘mass
customization’, where elaborate shapes can be fabricated from individual
components mass produced digitally as one-offs. Examples include projects
from the offices of NOX, Jiirgen Mayer, Zaha Hadid Architects, and Gehry
Partners.

Ghosts of ideas about truth to materials and function remain—through their
rejection—in projects by OMA with Rem Koolhaas: extensions to IIT’s
Mies-designed Commons building, 2003, for example; and Casa da Musica,
Porto, Portugal, 2005. These projects matched cheap materials with crude
fixings, rejecting the obsessive detailing of Mies and Lewerentz, whose
apparently simple elements required huge effort to make. OMA did this
both to critique modern architecture and to illustrate how present-day
concerns—like increased developer profits, mass-produced building
components, and diminishing craft skills—mean that architectural detailing,
as once understood, can seem largely impossible. OMA’s deliberately ‘bad’
details remain as considered, however, as any they criticize.

The plans of famous modern buildings could often be summarized in simple
organizational diagrams, so-called ‘parti sketches’, like Mies’s Crown Hall
—a steel pavilion sat on a base—or Kahn’s Yale Center for Fine Art—a
stack of floorplates punctured with vertical volumes. Another strand of
contemporary practice emphasizes clear, if not always so straightforwardly
functional, plan or section diagrams. Kazuyo Sejima + Ryue

Nishizawa/SANAA’s Leaming Centre in Lausanne, Switzerland, 2010,
provides an example, conceived as a giant free-plan space sandwiched
between undulating floor and roof planes with circular courtyards drilled
through. MVRDV’s Market Hall, Rotterdam, 2014, enclosed stalls under a
vast hoop of flats. Such projects are defined by the logic of their diagrams,
which control characteristic aspects of the architecture.

The idea of regionalism—associated with Gut Garkau Farm and Saynatsalo
Town Hall—persists among architects who seek to adapt forces of
globalized construction to local conditions, pursuing contemporary national
architectures. Such thinking underpins otherwise hugely divergent designs
from the offices of Wang Shu and Lu Wenyu in China, for example,
Rogelio Salmona in Colombia, and Glenn Murcutt in rural Australia.

Ideas from the 1960s counter-culture also persist. Ongoing interest in self-
build is exemplified by projects facilitated in Chile by architects Elemental,
and in Burkina Faso by Diébédo Francis Kéré. Evidence about climate
change caused by human activity has renewed Fuller’s concerns about the
urgency of ecological design. Responses range from technological
approaches—inventing devices to reduce the energy consumption of other
devices, as in the ‘eco-tech’ practice of T.R. Hamzah & Yeang from
Malaysia, and later work from Foster’s office—to those rejecting complex
technologies—like buildings at the Centre for Alternative Technology,
Machynlleth, Wales.

Various strands of contemporary practice, occasionally called ‘neo-
modern’, trade in the imagery of modern architecture without subscribing
so strictly to its moralities. Examples include the ‘crafted boxes’ of Gigon
Guyer’s practice in Switzerland, and the white architectures of Alvaro Siza
and Eduardo Souto da Moura in Portugal enlivened with thoughtful,
whimsical details. Similarly, Peter Zumthor’s sensory modern architecture
enriches simple forms with evocative materials to engender emotive
atmospheres. Such projects aspire to the imagery of truth to materials
without necessarily achieving it, seeking to maintain the illusion of simple
construction after new regulatory regimes have made architectural
simplicity significantly harder to achieve.

Regulation and risk

It might seem curious to turn to the emergence of building regulations in
concluding this book, but they were decisive in both the demise of modern
imagery, and the simultaneous consolidation of modern values in the
present-day construction industry.

Building regulations multiplied in most Western countries during the latter
part of the 20th century as a cultural consequence of the forces of industrial
production. Regulatory regimes burgeoned in a postwar context of state
paternalism and increasing professionalization, seeking to regularize non-
professionals, and to protect the public from excesses of profit-driven
developers, consultants, and landlords. They also responded to a loss of
construction skills following an increasing decline in architectural
ornamentation. This decline diminished cultures of craft and artisanal care
in building, alongside a corresponding proliferation of industrial building
products—including window, door, and roofing components—understood
as technical systems. Clients increasingly began to insist upon the
warranties that came with such systems, giving architects increasingly
fewer opportunities to invent evocative details—like Aalto did—
progressively rendering designers as shoppers for, and coordinators of,
mass-produced parts.

Building regulations progressively made modemism unworkable at the
level of detail. Increasing requirements for greater insulation necessitated
ever more complex interfaces between components, serving to thicken-up
previously simple, slender connections. Likewise, structural rules required
additional factors of safety in steel and concrete sizing, frustrating the
imagery of lightness. Also, certain accessibility regulations have dictated
contrasting surfaces to assist people with visual impairments, outlawing
visual simplicity by multiplying textures and colours—additionally
prohibiting the modern detail where wall materials continue as floor
materials, as at St Peter’s, Klippan.

In contrast, however, building regulation regimes have also consolidated
other priorities of modern architecture. They usually required the
submission of structural calculations, which had the effect of promoting

steel and concrete frames—that engineers find easier to analyse—over
timber and masonry. They have often specified consistent light levels—in
classrooms and offices for example—requiring artificial lighting even
where windows are present because natural light is deemed too unreliable
for healthy screen use. Similarly, rules quantifying the number of air
changes needed per hour in certain spaces have frequently discounted
natural ventilation as unpredictable, dictating mechanical air handling.
Regulations like these deal largely in technical performance and, as such,
their values clearly derive from modem architecture—focused on function,
with little to say about what buildings look and feel like.

These values inherent in building regulation regimes resonate with the
current international construction industry. Fuelled by global finance,
consuming mass-produced building products, resourced by multinational
consultants, that industry has become highly risk-averse. It tends to prefer
quantitative data about the timely and profitable delivery of buildings over
wearisome considerations about their visual qualities, cultural meanings,
and atmospheres. Indeed, surveyors, project managers, and engineers—
frequently more adept than architects in the language of reliable delivery,
like Paxton and Eiffel more than a century before—have assumed the bulk
of project management from architects in numerous national contexts. Thus,
innovative architectural imagery has regularly become understood as
unnecessarily risky. Architects—preoccupied with design ideas, frequently
more concemed with the qualities of finished buildings than management
processes used to deliver them—can struggle to get heard in contemporary
construction. Dominant industry values have become so unshakeably
modern—rooted in technical criteria, ambivalent to visual, social, and
atmospheric qualities—that architects, many of whom now question
modern priorities, can regularly feel they don’t belong.

Multiple modernities

In retrospect, it’s easy to caricature modern architecture as symbolizing the
idea of modernity as an unquestioned good: promoting technology, industry,
and novelty as progress; celebrating the globalization of trade, finance, and
culture. It’s also easy to caricature, in opposition, a renewed preference for
traditional architectures—romanticizing a return to historical motifs, local

materials, and time-honoured crafts—as symbolizing a rejection of
modernity in favour of reclaiming a sentimental idea of the pre-industrial
past. However, these positions are false opposites. Modernity and modern
architecture were always double-edged. The popular uptake of new
technologies was always accompanied by anxieties about the effects of
industrialization and globalization. These contradictions were exemplified
by the medieval imagery of suburban villas constructed by British
developers in the 1930s, which were nevertheless kitted-out with electric
light, radios, telephones, and kitchen devices, Over time, there have been
numerous global equivalents of these houses, fitting versions of Fuller’s
technological environments inside traditional-looking architectural cloaks.
Architects and critics, schooled in modern ideas about architecture as an
honest reflection of the age, usually scorn them. But such buildings stand as
preliminary attempts to reconcile modernity with previous cultures and
priorities of everyday life, just like the architectures of Aalto, Kahn, and
Lewerentz did more artfully. They reflect complex, provisional settlements
between ideas of future and past, progress and history, global and local,
industrial and pastoral, universal and particular, individual and civic, and
mass produced and artisan. They stand, awkwardly, for the simultaneous
popular acceptance and rejection of modernity and its priorities. The
continuing prevalence of such architectures illustrates ongoing difficulties
in grasping what modernity was, and negotiating what its implications
continue to be. It’s clear that, for much of the 20th century, modern
architecture stood for the place of the future—as related to the past—in the
present. But the associations of those ideas about future, present, and past
always remained complex, changing, and contested.

For all its global effects, modernity was never a unified phenomenon.
Aspects of the experience of modernity were shared, characterized by new
technologies which accelerated change in urbanization, work, and domestic
life. However, modernity was experienced differently by different people in
different places at different times: hardly the same in Soviet Romania as in
Canada, or at the end of the 18th century as in the middle of the 20th.
Indeed, it felt different depending on the opportunities, or lack of them,
afforded by people’s wealth, class, gender, and ethnicity. Just as experiences
of modernity were complex and diverse, so the famous modern buildings
I’ve introduced here had ideas in common and others that separated them.

In various ways, however, they all exhibited faith in the social promise of
technology. They celebrated architectural innovation, imagining that a
changed architecture was necessary to represent a changed world, at a time
when the rate of social and industrial change kept increasing. Their images
expressed optimism that modemity could transform people’s lives for the
better. And there were times and places when that optimism seemed
infectious.
