BOOK RStephen Sennott I.pdf
INTRODUCTION

In its broad coverage of architecture produced between 1900 and 2000, the provides
a three-volume, English-language reference work for scholars, professionals, students,
and the general public seeking a basic understanding of interdependent topics that define
the production of architecture in the developed cities, countries, and regions of the world.
Seeking the breadth and diversity of any encyclopedic endeavor, the project extends its
coverage beyond the conventional study of prominent architects and their buildings to
address important related facets of 20th-century architectural production that motivate
architects and their clients and give form and meaning to their buildings.

Arranged in alphabetical order, the entries fall into three broad areas: persons, places,
and architecture topics. Persons include architects and firms, critics, and historians;
places include countries and regions, cities, specific buildings and sites, and unbuilt
projects; architecture topics include materials and building technology, building types,
stylistic and theoretical terms, schools and movements, architectural practice and the
profession, and planning. Ranging in length from 1,000 to 4,000 words, each article is
written for the well-informed general reader and signed by an established scholar or
professional with expertise in the subject. In addition, each architecture topic and places
entry includes a selected bibliography; each person’s entry includes a capsule biography,
a list of selected works, and a selected bibliography. The bibliographies consist of
standard works and recent scholarship to enable the student or scholar to expand his or
her research.

This project set out in 1998 in Chicago with the editorial staff of Fitzroy Dearborn
Publishers to shape a broad and inclusive reference work designed to provide description
and analysis of 20th-century architects, buildings, and places from a global perspective.
In its review of an enormously inventive century of ambitious architectural production,
the editorial team quickly recognized that the most useful reference work would include
far more than buildings and architects alone. The therefore aims to explain the range
of technological, professional, and historical factors that the architectural process entails,
from drawings to the completed building. The far-reaching influence of important
architects, sustainability and new materials, new digital technologies, and global
proliferation of large-scale building types, for example, has altered the scope of modern
architectural practice. Moreover, 20th-century architecture profoundly engaged many
new constituencies, including the general public. In its efforts to provide a broader
audience with a more inclusive understanding of architectural practice, the project seeks
to frame a vast scope of selected topics that have defined and directed 20th-century
architecture and its consumption worldwide.

The practice of architecture has become enormously complex, as modern airports and
skyscrapers make clear. Wherever constructed, a single building requires the design team
to understand traditional and innovative materials, new construction technologies,
building types, historic precedent, and related planning needs. Readers of the will


benefit from an understanding of these interconnections. It is the editorial team’s belief
that one strength of this project is the selective inclusion of a diverse range of architecture
subjects rarely examined together with important buildings and their architects. To
facilitate these connections, the book provides readers with extensive internal cross-
references in the majority of entries and a comprehensive, analytical index.

International coverage required a variety of critical perspectives from a diverse group
of scholarly and professional experts. From the start, the task of defining the scope and
content of this project reiterated the complexity of architectural production in the last
hundred years. Consulting for several months with a distinguished international advisory
board of scholars and architects, architectural historian and volume editor R.Stephen
Sennott has organized a far-reaching investigation of architecture from all regions of the
world. The final selection of topics found in these three volumes is the result of a long
and careful evaluation of a much longer list of proposed topics.

To the benefit of this project, the advisory board’s contributions were both
contradictory and consistent in their careful explanations of what should be included or
excluded from these pages. This debate served to balance the book’s perspective and
content. In short, the principal criteria for inclusion were, first, that the individual or topic
had had a lasting or formative effect on architecture or, second, that the individual or
topic reinforced the international scope of the encyclopedia. One strength of this
reference work is its deliberate effort to accommodate these differences and
contradictions by including a diverse range of advisors and a balanced variety of expert
writers able to recognize the global character of architectural practice in the 20th century.
In concert with the advisory board’s recommendations, the book profiles this century’s
vast chronicle of architectural achievements within and well beyond the confines of mid-
century modernism. Even so, and with apologies to readers who note the absence of a
subject they hold as significant, it has obviously not been possible to include every
architect, building, or topic of architectural significance. Indeed, following this
challenging editorial process, and in light of compelling scholarship of the last 15 years,
it is the editorial team’s collective hope that this project will encourage further study of
the global, interconnected character of architecture and its production. The encyclopedia
will provide an effective starting point for researchers and readers for years ahead.

Whatever the risks of this ambitious reference work, an international team of 300
writers—architectural historians, architects, engineers, preservationists, urban historians,
critics, and independent scholars—has presented a wide-ranging and critical assessment
of buildings, architects, cities, and related architecture topics to provide professionals and
general readers alike with an integrated view of architectural production around the
world. Scholars and practitioners from related design and building professions have
written more than 700 entries that collectively provide readers with a distinct approach to
20th-century architecture’s materials, theory, design, and practice. Such a broad and
sweeping study invites complexities and risks; to leave some of these as unresolved
defines some aspects of modern and contemporary architectural practice. This diversity
of authorship and critical viewpoints makes this a requisite source for general readers and
the architectural profession alike as they seek basic information about 20th-century
architecture. Given its expansive sweep, the is directed at a diverse readership and
provides a wide variety of information on a great number of subjects.


Architectural Topics (179 entries)

From broad and inclusive entries to shorter entries, topics have been selected because of
their generally acknowledged importance in directing architectural form, fulfilling
programmatic needs, directing style and change, and otherwise affecting the practice of
architecture during the 20th century. Entries describe the topic and evaluate its effect on
buildings, architects, or places around the world.

Materials and Building Technology (35 entries)

Entries on traditional or innovative materials describe the origins, needs, and purposes of
an important building material as it evolved during the 20th century (e.g., Aluminum,
Reinforced Concrete, and Truss Systems). For example, concrete has a long history;
however, its dramatic new capacities have generated new construction methods as well as
innovative architectural form. The 20th century witnessed the invention of many new
building technologies and systems, making significant contributions to architectural
function. For example, air conditioning has allowed large-scale buildings to be built with
new standards for comfort in extreme climatic conditions.

Building Types (53 entries)

Building types vary in their associations with form, function, or program. Many types
resulted from new needs that served new methods of transportation or evolving social,
industrial, recreational, or economic needs. Entries describe the building types’ forms and
uses, with focus on how established building types changed during the 20th century (such
as Church, House, School, Skyscraper). For example, the skyscraper has been exported
from American cities to rapidly developing cities in Asia, and the resulting designs have
transformed the scale and appearance of these corporate emblems.

Stylistic and Theoretical Terms (34 entries)

Entries vary among stylistic categories and theoretical ideas that have guided architects,
their clients, and recent writers and critics. Brief essays on stylistic terms characterize the
features that define the style (e.g., Craftsman Style, Prairie School) while contextualizing
their subject within broad regional or global applications. Longer essays on theoretical
terms (e.g., Art Deco, Modernism, and Postmodernism) seek to synthesize the generally

accepted meaning of these terms for the general reader, identifying key writers,
architects, and representative buildings as examples.

Schools and Movements (12 entries)

Frequently, like-minded architects and supportive critics or historians have banded
together to form groups, schools, and movements (both organized and loosely collective)
to promote their design ideals, or retrospectively, historians have designated members of
a movement on the basis of formal and historical analyses. These types of entries (e.g.,
Constructivism, De Stijl, Memphis Group) identify significant leaders and explain the
goals or intentions of these groups, where and for how long each school or movement has
been influential or successful, and their contributions to subsequent generations.

Architectural Practice and the Profession (20 entries)

In its attention to 20th-century architectural practice and education, this section includes
topics that examine some of the important changes in the profession and its
administration. Similarly, entries address how architects and their buildings are evaluated
and awarded (e.g., Architectural Drawing, Education of Architects/Schools,
Environmental Issues, Pritzker Architecture Prize).

Planning (24 entries)

The 20th century is marked by the evolution of the planning profession in response to
new and large-scale transportation and infrastructure needs. Architects and planners have
often collaborated to bring about new kinds of urban, suburban, and rural development.
Examples of these entries include Campus Planning, Garden City Movement, New
Urbanism, and Plan of Chicago.

Persons (292 entries)

Individuals have been chosen because they have contributed significantly to the history of
20th-century architecture. Regardless of where they practice in the world, individuals
have typically been recognized as founders or leaders in their own time or documented as

highly influential practitioners for subsequent generations. Typically, they have been
recognized professionally by well-known awards, prizes, or other honors. These entries
consist of a signed critical essay, a capsule biography, a list of important buildings (in the
case of architect entries), and a bibliography of useful sources.

Architects and Firms (267 entries)

Architects and firms have been chosen because of their important contributions
throughout the world or within the boundaries of the country or regions where they
practice. In addition to the world’s well-known architects and firms, the editor and
advisory board sought to include a diverse group of architects not frequently included in
standard reference works. Their work has often been recognized by their peers and juries
for the superior quality of their architectural designs at a regional, national, or
international level.

Critics and Historians (25 entries)

In these entries, influential critics and historians represent ways in which primary
writings and assorted publications have significantly affected 20th-century architecture
and its reception within professional circles and the public realm.

Places (277 entries)

Given the rapid changes that define this century’s political and geographical boundaries,
the advisory board chose to blend regional and national surveys with the project’s
deliberate focus on major and progressive cities around the world that can be evaluated
for their architectural significance. These essays will inevitably privilege the most well-
known places (including countries and major cities), but they also will provide a far more
diverse selection than currently is available in architecture reference works.
With the 2002 acquisition of this project from Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers by the
Taylor and Francis Group, an inspiring and experienced editorial team at Routledge
Reference brought this to fruition. In the course of editing and producing this book,
they have researched and assembled over 500 photographs and illustrations that trace the
developments in architecture around the globe and across the 20th century. In addition,
each of the three volumes has an eight-page insert of color photographs. The result is an
encyclopedia that provides not only depth and breadth of scholarship but also beautifully
illustrates the many facets of 20th-century architecture.


The few existing reference works related to architecture include dictionaries of
individual architects or individual countries and a range of encyclopedia topics; however,
the is distinguished by its global scope and purposeful integration of architects and
buildings with a selected set of highly important architectural topics. It is the hope of the
practicing architects and engineers, architectural historians, preservationists, and other
experts, who have together created this multilayered examination of 20th-century
architecture, that this reference work will be an indispensable addition to any art,
architecture, or history library.

A

AALTO, ALVAR 1898-1976

Architect, Finland

Hugo Alvar Henrik Aalto, whose architecture is often described as organic and close
to nature, is regarded as one of the most significant architects of the 20th century. The
majority of historians and critics emphasize three aspects in Aalto’s architecture that set it
apart from any other architect’s work and explain his importance: his concern for the
human qualities of the environment, his love of nature, and his Finnish heritage.

It seems that Aalto’s architecture is a socially refined reflection of Le Corbusier’s
work, a masterly connection of avant-garde culture with traditional values. Despite being
well integrated into the art world, apparently Aalto did not hesitate to include in his
designs unfashionable issues that were dismissed by other architects of his time:
individuality in mass housing, social equality in theaters, and his foible for details, such
as extreme, carefully planned light systems in public buildings. From this angle, Aalto
turns out to be a pure dissident of the avant-garde, emphasizing the complexity of
architecture by leaving aesthetic values behind him.

Even before adopting the language of modernist architecture, the young Aalto was
determined to be as avant-garde as possible, which in Scandinavia in the early 1920s
meant a sophisticated and mannerist neoclassicism. His early work shows the influence
of anonymous irregular Italian architecture and neoclassical formality as developed by
19th-century architects such as Carl Ludwig Engel, and these strategies were to remain
important throughout his career. His most interesting buildings from this time are the
Jyvaskyla Workers’ Club (1925), the church (1929) in Muurame, and the Seinajoki Civil
Guard Building (1926) and the Defense Corps Building (1929) in Jyvaskylé. Aalto
organized the facade of the Workers’ Club like the Palazzo Ducale in Venice by setting a
heavy, closed volume on airy Doric columns on the ground floor. The almost
symmetrical facade is challenged by a Palladian-style window that is shifted to one side,
marking the location of a theater on the first floor. The church in Muurame, which also
recalls an Italian motif, namely, Alberti’s Sant Andrea at Mantua, is on the outside very
much into the neoclassical tradition, whereas its interior emphasis on light anticipates
later church designs, such as the churches in Imatra and Wolfsburg.

In 1924 Aalto traveled to Vienna and Italy with his wife and partner Aino Marsio,
where he made several sketches that had a great effect on their later work. However,
Aalto did not ignore the development in continental Europe, either, and his conversion to
international functionalism can be traced back to the autumn of 1927, when he and Erik
Bryggman jointly designed a modernist proposal for the Kauppiaitten Osakeyhtié office


building competition. Le Corbusier’s reputation among Scandinavian architects had been
widely disseminated by a 1926 article in the Swedish magazine by Uno Ahren, and
Aalto’s first functionalist buildings, the Standardized Apartment Building in Turku
(1928) and, more important, the Turun Sanomat office building (1929), demonstrated al
of Le Corbusier’s five points.

The beginning of international recognition was marked in 1929, when Aalto was
invited to join the newly founded CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture
Moderne) and he attended the second congress of CIAM in Frankfurt on the theme of
“Housing for the Existenzminimum.” Other masterpieces of functionalism were created
by Aalto in the following years, including the Paimio Tuberculosis Sanatorium (1933)
and the Viipuri Library (1935). During this time, Aalto started designing bent-plywood
furniture, which he later developed into standard types. From 1942 Aino Aalto directed
the Artek Company, which had been set up in 1935 for the manufacture of this furniture.
These experiments also affected the architectural designs: in the mid-1930s, Aalto
introduced the famous curved, suspended wooden ceiling as an acoustical device for the
lecture room of the Viipuri Library. Although the functioning of this element is very
questionable, curved walls and ceilings became typical of his later work.

In the 1930s, surprisingly enough, Aalto, who had until this point been known as the
most modern of Finnish architects, began returning to the vernacular tradition. With the
Finnish Pavilions to the World Exhibitions in Paris (1937) and New York (1939), he
infused functionalism with his own organic alternative and radically parted ways with
mainstream International Style. The critics appreciated this move, for they saw Aalto’s
primitivism in connection with his origin in the exotic and unspoiled Finland.

Most important for Aalto’s architectural reputation was Sigfried Giedion’s analysis in
the second edition of (1949). Giedion’s interpretation of Aalto’s work as Finnish,
organic, and irrational helped Aalto to achieve worldwide fame after World War IL The
integration of building and nature emerged as a central theme in Aalto’s work; this is
exemplified in his designs for the Sunila pulp mill (1937) and the Sunila housing for
employees (1939). In the engineering staff housing, the first fan-plan motif appears,
which became a crucial element in his designs. Characteristic of this period is his interest
in natural materials, such as wood, brick, and grass roofs, as he demonstrated in one of
his masterpieces, the Villa Mairea (1939) in Noormarkku. The villa is often praised for its
harmonious relationship with nature and reference to old Finnish farmsteads. However,
Finnish critics did not originally recognize Aalto’s buildings as particularly Finnish but,
rather, as Le Corbusiersian with Japanese touches. Gustaf Strengell noted that the
interiors of the Viipuri Library exhibited strikingly Japanese characteristics in their use of
light wood in its natural state. The Villa Mairea was originally a collage of Le Corbusian
modernism with Japanese tearooms, African columns, Cubist paintings, and continental
Heimatstil until it slowly became a paradigm of “Finnish” or “natural” architecture in the
modern architectural discourse.

After the war Aalto was again commissioned by the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to build a student dormitory, where brick was a typical material for the other
campus facades. The Baker Dormitory (1949) was Aalto’s first experiment with brick,
and throughout the 1950s his oeuvre was dominated by the use of red brick. Later, he
used the brick as a metaphor for standardization, claiming that the cell was the module of

nature, and the brick would occupy an analogous position in architecture. His most
important works of this period include the Expressionist House of Culture (1958) and the
National Pensions Institute office building (1957), both in Helsinki. The House of Culture
consists of a curvilmear theater and a rectangular office block, a typical Aalto
arrangement of organic versus orthogonal shapes, where the public space is articulated in
a free form and more private functions are placed in rectangular shapes. As in most of his
designs, all elements including the apparently free form follow a hidden geometric grid,
with the center being a fountain in the courtyard, where a giant hand presents a tiny
model of the building. Inside the theater, he experimented again with the acoustic ceiling
but also drew on references to the facade of Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoye. The Saynatsalo
Town Hall (1952), another brick building, is a small version of the piazza theme that
Aalto elaborated further in the town center of Seinajoki (1956-69). After the death of
Aino in 1949, Aalto married the architect Elissa Makiniemi, for whom he built the
Muuratsalo Summer House (1953), or experimental house with an inner courtyard. The
exterior walls are painted white, whereas the inner walls show brick patterns of various
De Stijl compositions.

Viipuri Library Lecture Hall, Vyborg,
Russia, designed by Alvar Aalto
(1927)

Photo © G.Welin 1935/Alvar Aalto
Archives

House of Culture, Helsinki, designed
by Alvar Aalto (1952-58)

Photo © H.Havas/Alvar Aalto
Archives

Although Aalto’s brick buildings from the late 1940s and 1950s won international
critical acclaim, for his commissions in Germany—the Hansaviertel House (1957) in
Berlin, the Neue Vahr Apartment building (1962), and the parish centers in Detmerode
(1968) and Wolfsburg (1962)—he chose international white modernism while at the
same time continuing to use brick in the Otaniemi (1974) and Jyvaskyla (1971)
universities. This choice may seem surprising, given that brick had a strong regional
connotation in Hanseatic cities, whereas in Finland the dominant building material was
wood. Hence, Aalto’s use of brick in Finland cannot be understood as primitive or
regional, and he himself connected brick rather with Central Europe, whereas Finnish
architects of around 1900 tended to view it as Russian. Aalto did not want to simply
reproduce tradition, and so he worked in both Finland and Germany explicitly against
tradition and concentrated more on the symbolic selfidentity of the community than on
local traditions or building techniques.

The German project Neue Vahr, a slender skyscraper in a suburb of Bremen and the
most daring use of the fan plan, is odd in another way. Although in 1934 he had proposed
high-rise housing for Munkkiniemi, Helsinki, Aalto was generally known as an


outspoken critic of tall buildings. He argued that high-rise apartments were, both socially
and architecturally, a considerably more dangerous form of building than single-family
houses or low-rise apartments, and therefore they needed a more stringent architectural
standard and greater artistry and social responsibility. Despite these reservations, in June
1958 he was appointed to build the 22-story tower Neue Vahr and later the Schénbiihl
high-rise block of flats (1968) in Lucerne, Switzerland. However, his solutions were
praised as outstanding examples of modern housing, and both the Hansaviertel House and
the Neue Vahr supported his reputation as a humanist architect among his modernists
colleagues.

In 1959 he received the commission for the Enso-Gutzeit headquarters on a prestigous
site next to the harbor of Helsinki. In this work he referred partly to the notion of an
Italian while at the same time responding to Engel’s neoclassical harbor front. With its
location right next to the Russian Orthodox Uspensky Cathedral, the strange composition
of the House of Culture is repeated: a rectangular modernist office building adjacent to a
curved public brick building. Aalto’s public buildings of this time are in the tradition of
Bruno Taut’s Stadtkrone: they are meant to support the identification of the individual
with the community and—appropriate for monuments—are usually cladded with marble
tiles. The striped marble facade of the Cultural Center (1962) in Wolfsburg is reminiscent
of Siena, whereas the white Finlandia hall (1971) looks more like a snowy hill. Both the
Finlandia and the Essen Opera House (competition 1959, completed 1988) are very much
in the Expressionist tradition and seem to celebrate the social event of visiting a theater
rather than responding to the functional needs of an opera.

Aalto’s image in crticism does not really reflect his sensitivity to region, nature, or the
human being in an abstract sense but rather in the context of critical debates on the lack
of regional, natural, and human qualities in international modernism. Thus, in Géran
Schildt’s characterization of Aalto as the secret opponent within the Modern movement,
the word “within” should be emphasized. Aalto did not undermine the cultural field of
modermism but exercised his critique internally. Many of his 1950s buildings, for
example, addressed the placelessness of modern architecture, which critics had
complained about. His Rautatalo office building (Helsinki, 1955) in particular was
singled out by critics as a successful example of contextualism because the brick corner
pilasters could be read as minimal markers that indicated respect for the built context, the
adjacent brick facade of the bank by Eliel Saarinen, without giving up the modern
agenda.

DORTE KUHLMANN

Contextualism; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, CharlesEdouard) (France); Finland;

Helsinki, Finland; International Style; Paimio Sanatorium, near Turku, Finland; Villa
Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland; Villa Savoye, Poissy, France

Biography

Born 3 February 1898, Kuortane, Finland; graduated in 1916 from Jyvaskyla Classical
Lyceum; earned diploma of architecture at the Institute of Technology, Helsinki, 1921.
Married Aino Marsio (1892-1949) in 1924; established private architectural office in
Jyvaskyla (from 1924 in collaboration with Aino Aalto), 1923-27. Private architectural

office in Turku (1927-33); private architectural office in Helsinki (1933-76). Appointed
visiting professor, Massachussetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 1940; returned to
Finland 1941; returned to United States, Professor, MIT (1946-48); Chairman of the
Association of Finnish Architects SAFA (Honorary Member 1943-58); married architect
Elissa Makiniemi, 1952; Member of the Finnish Academy, 1955 (Emeritus Member since
1968); President of the Finnish Academy, 1963-68; died 11 May 1976 in Helsinki.

Selected Works

Jyvaskyla Workers’ Club, Jyvaskyla, Finland, 1925
Seinajoki Civil Guard Building, Jyvaskyla, Finland, 1926
Standardized Apartment Building, Turku, Finland, 1928
Defense Corps Building, Jyvaskyla, Finland, 1929
Muurame Church, Muurame, Finland, 1929
Turun Sanomat office building, Turku, Finland, 1929
Paimio Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Paimio, Finland, 1933
Viipuri Library, Viipuri, Russia, 1935
Finnish Pavilion, World Exhibition in Paris, 1937
Finnish Pavilion, World Exhibition in New York, 1939
Sunila Pulp Mill, Kotka, Finland, 1937
Sunila Housing, Kotka, Finland, 1939
Villa Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland, 1939
Baker Dormitory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1949
Saynatsalo Town Hall, Saynatsalo, Finland, 1952
Muuratsalo Summer (Experimental) House, Muuratsalo, Finland, 1953
Rautatalo Office Building, Helsinki, Finland, 1955
National Pensions Institute office building, Helsinki, Finland, 1957
Hansaviertel House, Berlin, Germany, 1957
Expressionist House of Culture, Helsinki, Finland, 1958
Neue Vahr Apartment building, Bremen, Germany, 1962
Heilig Geist Parish Center, Wolfsburg, Germany, 1962
Enso-Gutzeit Headquarters, Helsinki, Finland, 1962
Sch6nbiihl Apartments, Lucerne, Switzerland, 1968

Further Reading

Fleig, Karl (editor), LIIL, Zurich: Artemis, 1963-78

Giedion, Sigfried, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1941, 2nd revised
edition, 1949

Jormakka, Kari, “House of Culture,” (1999)

Kuhlmann, Dérte (editor), (Human & Nature, Alvar Aalto in Germany), Weimar: Bauhaus
Universitat, 1999

Porphyrios, Demetri, London: Academy Editions, 1982

Quantrill, Malcolm, New York: Schocken Books, 1989
Reed, Peter (editor), (exhib. cat.), New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998

Schildt, Géran, translated by Timothy Binham, New York: Rizzoli, 1994
Weston, Richard, London: Phaidon Press, 1995

ABRAHAM, RAIMUND 1933-

Architect, Austria and United States
The Austrian-born architect Raimund Abraham has played an influential role in
architectural discourse and education over the last four decades. His challenging oeuvre
of unbuilt work, consisting almost entirely of seductive architectural renderings,
delineates a complex architectural position revolving around subversion, metaphor, and a
fascination with archetypal forms. His recently completed high-rise in Manhattan for the
Austrian Cultural Institute is the most recognizable of a portfolio of built work that has
brought together many of the philosophical themes that have preoccupied this enigmatic
architect over a prolonged period.
Raimund Abraham was born in Lienz, Austria, in 1933 and was educated at the
Technical University in Graz, graduating in 1958. In the early sixties Abraham followed
in the footsteps of avant-garde groups such as Archigram, the Metabolists, and fellow
Austrians Coop Himmelb(l)au in offering proposals for technology-driven Utopias
providing modular living environments capable of embodying the future requirements of
civilization. In these early projects, Abraham imagined cellular capsules that would be
inserted into vast organic communities comprising monolithic megastructures and
colossal bridges. These early idealistic visions demonstrated Abraham’s mastery of
drawing and collage that would suffuse his later work.
In 1964 Abraham moved to the United States to further a career in architectural
education, taking up a position as assistant professor at the Rhode Island School of
Design. Since 1971 Abraham has been involved in education at a range of major
international universities, holding professorships at the Cooper Union, the Pratt Institute,
and the graduate schools of Yale and Harvard. In 30 years of academic life, he has also
held visiting professorships at the University of California, Los Angeles; the
Architectural Association; and various other North American and European universities.
Abraham’s attitude to education, and his architectural practice, is subversive, and his
position is often critical of the architectural establishment and its compliance with the
principles of modern architecture. Abraham sees in modern architectural discourse a
rupture with history that has prevented architects from understanding completely the
elemental process of architecture. For Abraham, the 20th-century preoccupation with
fashion and style has prevented a thorough understanding of the principles of building
and the clarity of thought that they demand. Abraham urges a return to the a priori
principles of construction concerned with the nature of materials, site, and program.
Abraham posits architectural drawing as an equivalent means of expression, where the
paper becomes a site for the poetry of architecture. The intellectual act of building
surpasses the ultimate physical product. For Abraham, built architecture is often endemic
to the forces of compromise.


Throughout the 1970s, Abraham galvanized his theoretical position by undertaking an
extensive series of unbuilt houses concerned primarily with Heidegger’s notion of
dwelling. Abraham maintains that “collision” is the “ontological basis of architecture,”
offering as an example the horizon as the most basic junction between the earth and the
sky. Abraham defines the process of architecture as either digging into the earth, or
reach-ing for the sky—all building is intrinsically related to these primordial elements.
These elements become central to many of Abraham’s designs of the period, such as
House for the Sun and House with Two Horizons. The abstract house designs sought to
strip architecture down to its most essential state, arranging architectonic elements within
a formal language of rectilinear forms often embedded within the topology of a generic
natural site. Presented largely in rendered axonometric projection, the designs crystallized
complex theoretical principles into simple spatial meditations, as is evidenced by titles
such as House without Rooms, House with Three Walls, and House for Euclid.

In the 1980s Abraham’s attention turned toward monuments, concentrating on historic
European centers such as Venice, Berlin, and Paris. Abraham’s unbuilt projects from this
period interweave themes of juxtaposition and subversion to arrive at a new
monumentality capable of questioning the historical significance of architectural form.
The instability inherent in Abraham’s immersion within the historical landscape is most
evident in his projects for the city of Venice, the Les Halles Redevelopment in Paris, and
the competition entry for the New Acropolis Museum in Athens (for which he was short-
listed).

One of the most poignant projects from this period is the Monument to a Fallen
Building, completed in 1980. The project commemorates the collapse of the Berlin
Congress Hall in the same year, proposing a prism-like vault in which traces of the
former structure are symbolically revealed. Similar themes are inherent in his 1981
project for a Monument to the Absence of the Painting which mourns the loss of
Picasso’s masterpiece from its provincial base to another larger museum in Spain.
Abraham also addresses the issue of ownership in his project of 1982 for a monumental
church that would straddle the Berlin Wall, bringing a transcendental spirituality to the
contested space of the wall. All of Abraham’s projects from this period deeply question
the foundations of architecture and languish after a lost or forgotten meaning in
architectural discourse.

As well as his portfolio of unbuilt work, Abraham has also contributed important
buildings both in America and in his homeland of Austria. These include individual
houses, low-cost housing, and several commercial buildings. The completed buildings
demonstrate a fascination similar to his unbuilt work, using archetypal forms, layering,
and concision to question conventional architectural form.

In 1988 Abraham was runner-up to Daniel Libeskind in the competition for the
extension to the Jewish Museum in Berlin. Two years later, he successfully won the
commission to build the New Austrian Cultural Institute in Manhattan (other nominees
included Hans Hollein and Coop Himmelb(l)au). The recently completed 20-story tower
rises in the shape of a dramatic wedge from a narrow and heavily constrained site
obscured almost entirely by neighboring buildings. The front facade is layered with a
sloping curtain of cascading planes of glass punctuated by solid elements. Celebrating the
link between earth and sky, the powerful form of the tower and the heavy plinth of the


podium reinforces Abraham’s intention to return architecture to its most basic and
primeval elements.

Abraham’s challenging and often confronting work occupies an important place
within architectural discourse, fostering principles of resistance and legislating against
mediocrity. His attempts to return architecture to its philosophical origins in both built
and unbuilt projects are intrinsic of a position that attempts to blend the disparate forces
of philosophy, poetry, and architecture.

MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Archigram; Coop Himmelb(l)au (Austria); Metabolists

Selected Works

New Austrian Cultural Institute in Manhattan, New York City, United States, 2002

Further Reading

The 1996 monograph on Raimund Abraham, edited by Brigitte Groihofer, is by far the
most thorough collection of his work to date. The work brings together various essays by
other authors as well as some of the architect’s own writings. It contains an extensive
bibliography and color images of many of his drawings.

Groihofer, Brigitte (editor), Vienna: Springer-Verlag, 1996

ABSTRACTION

The 20th century is indelibly marked by the new vision realized by modern art. This
vision is no doubt a response to the success of material science, but it is also a cultural
phenomenon, an invention that helps us adjust to the new and often daunting horizons
that science and technology have opened up. Architecture has benefited as much from
that new artistic vision as it has from directly adopting new technology, and the invention
of abstract art is one of the important strands of this development.

Abstract art is a product of modern times. It can be seen to follow from the loss of
conviction sustained by the ancient view of art as imitation, or mimesis, that is,
representing the visible world and placing humanity into a visible narrative. To say that
photography supplanted representational art would be to oversimplify the story, but it
certainly played a part, and throughout the 19th century one can trace the steps by which
another standard gradually took the place of the time-honored one. In British Romantic
painter J.M.W.Tumer’s tumultuous landscapes and in the Impressionist Claude Monet’s
freely composed water lilies, we see a progression in which more and more weight is
given to the artist’s feelings in front of the motif, or the subject. It is through personal
selection that the artist abstracts the aspects that he or she desires to emphasize and out of

them constructs the composition, no longer bound by verisimilitude. Abstract art thus has
two principle components: abstraction and expression.

It was perhaps the fin-de-siécle French painter Paul Cézanne who brought the
movement to its point of precipitation since it was largely he who substituted the actual
vertical plane of the canvas for the virtual horizontal plane of Renaissance perspective.
His painting of a curve in the road creates a feeling about the road disappearing from
view, not through perspective but by the multiple relations invented in a flat composition
( 1882, Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Massachusetts). Equally, it was Vincent van
Gogh who painted with swirling pigment what he felt rather than what he saw. By 1907
the promptings of popular science were suggesting that physical reality must be quite
different from appearance, the search was on for the “fourth dimension,” and the time
was ripe for the invention of Cubism. Analytical Cubism allowed the artist to give a
metaphysically complex visual account of the subject, and Synthetic Cubism introduced
fragmented material from the world (newsprint, textiles, paper, string) into the picture
plane, or the artist’s composition. During World War I, abstraction progressed toward the
sublime purism of Piet Mondrian’s gridded, neoplasticist compositions and the ineffable
weightless rectangles of Kasimir Malevich, who opened a perspective with Russian
Suprematism that reaches through to the end of the century in the language of abstract
planes used by architects such as Peter Eisenman, Richard Meier, Rem Koolhaas, and
Zaha Hadid.

Architecture in the 20th century made its first steps in the shadow of the Arts and
Crafts tradition, with Charles Rennie Mackintosh, Josef Hoffmann, and Michel de Klerk,
among others. Architecture was as much in need of liberation as the plastic arts, but it
was at the same time in need of a new authority to replace ancient authority, something
more compelling than the intuition of the artist. One answer was found in the authority of
science. For architects, the innovative language of abstraction was not so much a gateway
to freer personal expression as an escape from the conventions of traditional construction.
It was no longer necessary to affix the Antique orders to facades or to follow academic
rules of ordonnance and symmetry in drawing plans. Abstract forms opposed no
difficulties of a formal kind to the idea of a plan freely following the program and so
freed architecture to create its own myth, that of functionalism. To the subjective
intuition of the artist, functionalism opposed a firm objective law similar to the laws of
nature.

There was a short time, hardly more than a year, when architecture came close to
sharing with art a complete autonomy of form. The year was 1923-24, when De Stijl
leader Theo van Doesburg collaborated with the architect Cornelius van Eesteren in
designs for villas. In projects such as of 1923, his use of axomometric projection
obscures for a moment the difference between an art composition created on the flat
plane of the canvas for contemplation and the threedimensional equivalent constructed in
real life for use. When van Doesburg designed the interior for the dance hall L’ Aubette in
Strasbourg, using dramatic rectangles set diagonally on the walls and ceiling, he could
not compensate for the ordinariness of banal adjuncts, such as balcony rails and fixed
seating, which seem to remove the viewer completely from the world of contemplation
proper to fine art. An even more poignant case is that of the Schréder House in Utrecht,
where Gerrit Rietveld’s exterior, like his famous chair, can certainly be contemplated as a

kind of artwork, while the interior is mediated by the dynamic use of movable screens for
privacy, reducing the object of contemplation to a practical convenience.

The paradox was fed by the polemical ideology of such protagonists of the Modern
movement in architecture as J.J.P.Oud and Le Corbusier, who led the way in identifying
architecture with engineering, thereby conceptualizing it as a subject that develops
through research and discovery, in which the interest will always be in the novel and not
in the already known. According to the credo of International Style, decisions in
architectural design should result from rational analysis of the functions, replacing the
traditional practice of starting from precedent, which was suffused by convention and
custom.

For some, the architect could not claim to shape his building from his inner
perceptions; it had to be shaped from something more socially relevant. Functionality
provided a rule apart from the purely subjective, and it was a rule that had little precedent
in the visual arts. The impact of abstraction within architecture was to create a new duty
toward the social function of the building and toward the physical material of
construction. Empirical needs would guide form, and form would be free to follow
function in the ecstatic exercise of liberation. Within architecture, then, abstraction and
functionalism appeared to share a common destiny.

In fine art, Mondrian remained the most extreme purist, and there is no question that
he identified avoidance of figuration as an expression of spirituality. In the heroic 1920s
and 1930s, artists such as Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse preferred to distort
appearances rather than abandon them. In the case of Fernand Leger, his Communist
sympathies kept him firmly focused on the essence of the worker, and between (1918)
and (1919), there is only a difference of degree; the figure remains. This enables us to
say something clear about abstraction, namely, that it is not exclusive. It is clearly
possible to employ abstraction in due measure without abandoning figuration.

The nascence of abstract art seemed to suggest a solution for architecture by
redefining nature itself as a kind of artist. This was the argument advanced in an
influential book by D’Arcy Thompson, (1917). Thompson conceived of nature as the
supreme designer, producing functional structures that were also intrinsically beautiful.
Not only do the skeletons of dinosaurs follow engineering principles, but the patterns of
growth in hard-shell mollusks observe strict mathematical rules, as the strictly
logarithmic series preserves a constant proportion. Nature thus seems to be the
penultimate designer, and the products of nature are “naturally” beautiful. As art
approached nature in following natural law, it could appropriate nature’s beauty. In the
book edited by Leslie Martin, Ben Nicholson, and Naum Gabo (1937), it is clear that
abstract form had taken on an aura of objectivity at odds with the reality of its subjective
origins.

It is not until De Stijl in the Netherlands and the Abstract Expressionists of the New
York School in the 1950s that one finds another impulse to abandon figuration, above all
with the mural-scale abstract canvases of Jackson Pollock, Robert Motherwell, and Mark
Rothko. In postwar painting the expressive gesture generated the source of meaning, and
the authenticity of that gesture became the guarantee of artistic truth. However, this
immediacy was difficult to achieve within architecture, with its reliance on physical
reality. The urge toward purity that the viewer found in Mondrian and later in Rothko is
marked with renunciation, and renunciation is truly difficult to reconcile with


functionalism. In art, all arguments are ad hominem, and what one person can do is
always exceptional. The idea that abstract art approached a deeper level of reality than
figurative art proved difficult to sustain as a general principle, and to this extent it seemed
that the hopes of objective validity pinned on bringing abstraction into architecture have
proved illusory.

During the crystallization of Modernism in the 1930s, it was simply not possible to
eliminate appearances; as long as buildings had to have openings such as doors and
windows, as long as they could be entered and used, they clearly served as utilities. Use
created meaning, at the most basic level, because doors not only permit entry but also
denote entry. The struggle for purity turned into a struggle to eliminate ornament, and this
was accentuated by the belief that only through standardization could the building’s
economy be fully realized. To match transparency in art, we have austerity in
architecture, epitomized by the German architect Mies van der Rohe. Standardization was
considered the key to realizing the full benefits of mass production. With standardization
went repetition, and the monotony of the curtain wall in identical glass panels reduced the
possibility of expressive form. It was enough that buildings were massive and impressive,
tailored to the demands of modern business, and expression was demonstrated in seeing
which city had the tallest building.

From the pluralism of Postmodernism, it became evident that standardization was not
as effective in economic terms as marketing. The appearance of a steel-frame building
could be changed at will in order to present a spectacular image; the facade became a
surface of signification, and irony, humor, and eclectic style were manipulated in such a
transformation. Strict economy of construction held less expressive importance. With the
end of the 20th century, it became possible to see that the authenticity attributed to
abstract forms was balanced by the freedom they conferred upon expression. This was
manifest in the 1960s and 1970s within fine art but not within architecture. Today, in the
work of Frank Gehry, Peter Eisenman, Daniel Libeskind, and Zaha Hadid, there is no
longer any concealment of the expressive gesture.

Except in extreme cases, such as aircraft design, forms are primarily derived not from
a scientific analysis of the functional requirements but from the creative feelings of the
designer. The architect can have feelings about the function as well as everything else,
but he or she is now permitted to sublimate these into a more general concept of the
purpose and meaning of a building. So, for example, Libeskind’s Holocaust Museum in
Berlin is conceived from a universal set of emotions including suffering and persecution,
and the jagged forms of the windows are an expression of this emotive tenor and not a
response to the practical uses of daylight. In the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in
Bilbao, Spain, Gehry’s abstract, dynamic forms derive from the capacity of the computer
to control the fabrication of complex components and allow him to generate an
architectural composition as powerful as anything displayed inside the functional
building that it also is. In this way, the architect has acquired the technical means that will
allow him or her to “build” gesture with all the immediacy of the painter. Abstraction
emerges as an acknowledged means of expression.

ROBERT MAXWELL

Arts and Crafts Movement; Le Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France);
Cubism; Curtain Wall System; de Klerk, Michel (Netherlands); De Stijl; Eisenman, Peter
(United States); Gehry, Frank (United States); Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao, Spain;

Guggenheim Museum, New York; Hoffmann, Josef (Austria); International Style;
Koolhaas, Rem (Netherlands); Mackintosh, Charles Rennie (Scotland); Meier, Richard
(United States); Oud, J.J.P. (Netherlands); Postmodernism; Rietveld, Gerrit
(Netherlands); van Doesburg, Theo (Netherlands).

Further Reading
Frampton, Kenneth, New York: Oxford University Press, 1980
Henderson, Linda D., Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1983
Jaffé, Hans Ludwig C, Amsterdam: Meulenhoff, 1956
Jencks, Charles, New York: Rizzoli, 1980
Jencks, Charles, New York: Rizzoli Intemational, 1990
Martin, J.L., Ben Nicholson, and Naum Gabo (editors), London: Faber, 1937
Rowland, Kurt F., New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1973

Thompson, D’Arcy Wentworth, Cambridge: University Press, 1917; abridged edition, edited by
John Tyler Bonner, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1961

ABTEIBERG MUNICIPAL MUSEUM,
MONCHENGLADBACH, GERMANY

Designed by Hans Hollein; completed 1982

Since the 1990s, it has not been uncommon for architects and their clients to break
with the two previously prevailing alternatives—temple or warehouse—for art museums,
but such a typological rupture had been dramatically anticipated two decades earlier, by
Hans Hollein in the Museum Abteiberg, a unique building tailored to an unusual site and
a distinctive collection. The Pritzker Prize laureate of 1985, who was born in Vienna in
1934 and is an artist, teacher, and creator of furniture, interiors, and exhibitions, has at
Monchengladbach assembled a virtual primer of museum design, one that has brought a
heretofore unknown visceral excitement to the vocation of museum going. In contrast to
later attempts in this genre, however, Hollein’s achievement has contributed to an
intensified appreciation of the museum’s contents rather than making a personal
statement at their expense.

Although Hollein has learned from the institutional buildings of Louis I.Kahn and
Alvar Aalto, he listens to his own music, which—to pursue the metaphor—includes
concerti from the 18th, symphonies from the 19th, and popular songs from the 20th
centuries. His eclecticism served him well in this complex commission, made more
difficult by the need for the museum to serve urban as well as aesthetic ends. Hollein has
linked Ménchengladbach’s town center on the heights with the medieval Ettal Abbey
(today the city hall) on the slopes below, assembling a multi-tiered museum from a series
of discrete elements of different sizes and shapes that provide a series of delightfully
varied indoor and outdoor rooms. Distributing the individual volumes in space rather than

containing them within a monolithic whole allowed him to maintain the picturesque scale
of the town; at the subterranean level, the disparate sections are united.

Although designing a museum is always challenging, it is perhaps less onerous when,
in contrast to those encyclopedic institutions that are in continual flux, its holdings
consist of a focused group of works. Kahn found such a golden opportunity in the
Kimbell Museum, and Hollein has exploited the similar possibilities here, where he
worked closely with the director, Jonathan Cladders, in formulating the program. They
believe that today the museum itself represents a (total work of art), “a huge scenario
into which the individual work is fitted...not the autonomy of the work at any price but
the deliberately staged correspondence between space and work of

Abteiburg Museum,
Monchengladbach, Germany, designed
by Hans Hollein (1972-82)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

art” (Klotz, 1985, p. 19). This especially applies to contemporary art, which frequently is
deliberately produced for a museum setting. The plan that Hollein and Cladders evolved
is without precedent for this building type. None of the customary tropes, whether
conventional or modern—vaulted galleries arranged symmetrically, the universal space,
the proverbial white cube—are present. Instead, the combination of small, contained
cabinets and larger rooms perfectly accommodates a collection that, although including
some historical pieces, is mainly focused on the post-World War II period and, although
international, is richly endowed with work by American artists of such competing
movements as Minimalism, Post-Painterly Abstraction, and Pop. Many works are in the

form of installations without customary boundaries or frames and do not necessarily
require natural light.

From the town, one enters the museum precinct via an elevated walkway that leads to
a stone-faced platform whereon is set a tower containing administrative offices; a library;
workshops and storage; a cubic, top-lighted undivided volume for temporary displays; the
shedroofed, zinc-clad “clover-leaf’ pavilion for the permanent collection; and the
entrance temple. The platform also covers museum spaces excavated into the hill, and
from it, one can descend gradually to curving terraces, furnished with sculpture, that
border the gardens of the former abbey; beneath a portion of the terraces are additional
exhibition areas.

Hollein has rejected the prescribed routes encountered in traditional museums for
mysterious, polymorphous paths that compel the viewer to wander on her own and
discover unexpected places, then to turn back on them or chance on new chambers.
Because chronology is not the issue it would be for a historically based collection, the ad
hoc character is stimulating rather than frustrating. Upstairs and downstairs, under- and
above-ground, the variously configured galleries illuminated by diverse means—daylight
through windows and skylights and artificial light via incandescent, neon, and fluorescent
fixtures—permit individual works to be perceived in the setting most sympathetic to their
makers’ intentions. The most organized part of the display areas comprises what Hollein
calls the “cloverleaf’—a group of seven “kissing squares,” to use Kahn’s formulation,
that are traversed at the corners. Set under saw-toothed skylights, these rooms are ideal
for big pieces by such artists as Andy Warhol, Frank Stella, Carl Andre, and Roy
Lichtenstein. There are also curved rooms, some with undulating walls that are positively
Baroque in character; double-height spaces and circular steps add further drama.
Hollein’s rejection of the convention of amorphous flexible areas, dominant since the
1940s, in favor of a rich variety of specific and distinctive spaces, would in the 1990s
become a popular solution for art museums—yet another example of the way the
Museum Abteiberg adumbrates many later schemes for this type of institution.

Also prescient is Hollein’s interjection of playfulness and irony into the reverence that
typically pervades museum design. Although marble clads some of the surfaces, it is
combined with less elevated masonry materials like brick and sandstone. Reflective as
well as transparent glass appears; zinc is placed beside chromium and steel. One side of
the temple-like pavilion that forms the main entrance sports graffiti in red paint, matching
the color of some of the railings. Exterior light fixtures have an industrial character in
contrast to the lush surrounding landscape and the textured brick walls and paths. The
visitor, constantly encountering the unpredictable, is sensitized to the daring originality of
the art displayed.

It is instructive to compare Museum Abteiberg with another German museum from the
same period that similarly had a profound effect on subsequent museum design—James
Stirling’s Neue Staatsgalerie (1977-84) at Stuttgart. Both are set on irregular terrain and
require urbanistic interventions, but Stirling’s solution revives and updates the 19th-
century museum paradigm, whereas Hollein has jettisoned all previous solutions. Both
make reference to industrial as well as classical buildings and use the technique of
compositional collage, yet their differences illuminate the manifold possibilities inherent
in the museum program.

HELEN SEARING

Aalto, Alvar (Finland), Hollein, Hans (Austria); Kahn, Louis (United States);
Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth, Texas; Neue Staatsgalerie, Stuttgart; Stirling, James
(England)

Further Reading

Allégret, Laurence, (Tome 2), Paris: Editions du Moniteur, 1992

Cladders, Johannes, “Museum Abteiberg Ménchengladbach,” (March 1980)

Davis, Douglas, New York: Abbeville, 1990

Frampton, Kenneth, “Meditations on an Aircraft Carrier: Hollein’s Monchengladbach,” U (E8502)
(1985), pp. 142-144

Géssel, Peter, and Gabriele Leuthiuser, Cologne: Taschen, 1991

Klotz, Heinrich, and Waltraud Krase, Frankfurt: Ernst Klett Verlage, 1985

Kramer, Steffen, Hildesheim, New York: Georg Ulms, 1998

Montaner, Josep, and Jorid Oliveras, Stuttgart/Zurich: Karl Kramer Verlag, 1987

Pettana, Gianni, Milan and New York: Idea Books, 1988

ABUJA, FEDERAL CAPITAL COMPLEX
OF NIGERIA

Designed by Kenzo Tange; completed 1981

In 1976 the Nigerian state authorities believed that a new federal capital city would
facilitate the creation of a “federal character” and thus resolve the problem of nepotism
and relieve ethnic tensions among the 250 cultural groups that constitute the Nigerian
nation. Abuja and its architecture, it was believed, would also remove the colonial
identity that the erstwhile capital city of Lagos was thought to bestow on the Nigerian
people.

As a result, the role of Lagos as the federal capital of Nigeria has been in question
from 1960, when Nigeria became independent, to 9 August 1975, when General Murutala
Mohammed set up an eight-member Committee on the Location of the Federal Capital of
Nigeria. The task of the committee was to review the multiple roles of Lagos as the
federal capital of Nigeria, the capital of the state of Lagos, and the economic capital of
the country.

The committee concluded that a new federal capital would improve Nigeria’s national
security, enhance Nigerian interior development, encourage the decentralization of
economic infrastructures from Lagos, and enhance the development of an indigenous
Nigerian building culture and industry. Finally, the new capital would emphasize
Nigeria’s emergence from the civil war of 1967-70 as a more united, stable, and
confident country. Nigerian lawmakers who shared the opinions of the committee
justified the idea of developing a new federal capital by suggesting that there existed a
fundamental need for a place where all Nigerians could come together on an equal basis
to help foster national unity. Moreover, advocates of a new federal capital city raised the


problems of overcrowding and lack of land for future expansion at Lagos as well as the
existence of severe social inequality in the colonial cities of Nigeria. As a result, Abuja
was conceived as a place that symbolized Nigeria’s autonomy from British colonization,
urban segregation, and a federal character that all Nigerians could share in regardless of
ethnic heritage. According to the committee and the International Planning Association
(IPA), the new capitol would provide “a balanced development focus for the nation” (see
1979). They chose Japanese modernist Kenzo Tange, a protégé of Le Corbusier, as
the principal architect for the city plan.
The federal government of Nigeria produced a schedule for implementing the
committee’s recommendations on 4 February 1976. Decree No. 6 established for Nigeria
a Federal Capital Territory—an African version of the District of Columbia—a neutral
ground where a Nigerian federal character would be developed for the good of all
Nigerians. The government took an 8,000-square-kilometer parcel (more than twice the
size of the state of Lagos) out of three minority states. Abuja is located on the Gwagwa
Plains in the middle of Nigeria; its high elevation and numerous hills contribute to a year-
round pleasant climate, one of the major attractions that influenced the committee to
select the site.
Abuja was conceived as a city for three million people to be developed in 20 years,
and its master plan symbolized the themes of democracy and Nigerian unity.
Construction began at Abuja in 1981 under the leadership of President Shehu Shagari
(who was later deposed), who was anxious to move from Lagos to the new Federal
Capital Territory.

The Nigerian authorities of state insisted that Aso Hill must be the most prominent
element within the Federal Capital Territory. Aso Hill is a huge granite outcrop (1,300
feet high) that dominates the landscape of Abuja and its vicinity visually and physically,
giving the city a natural east-west axis. Moreover, creating the image of a democratic
landscape that emblemizes the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (patterned
after the United States’ checks-and-balances system of government) was also an integral
part of the Abuja urban design scheme. As a result, a democratic shrine called the Three
Arms Zone was created at the foot of Aso Hill, making it the focal point of the city and
the locus of power of the federal government of Nigeria. Abuja’s Three Arms Zone is one
kilometer in diameter, and the buildings of the National Assembly, the Presidential
Palace, and the Supreme Court are located within it. From Aso Hill in the east end of the
city, one moves through the ceremonial Abuja National Mall, which is also patterned
after that of Washington, D.C. However, the axial view of the mall is flanked by high-rise
federal office buildings on both sides, terminating first at the quintuple towers of the
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation and finally at the National Stadium in the west
of the city.

Abuja, Federal Capital Territory of
Nigeria

Urban design model of Abuja, Nigeria,
designed by Kenzo Tange

© Nnamdi Elleh

Although the Abuja master plan also aspires to position the city as a major pan-
African commercial, financial, and political center, it is dominated by a rhetoric of
Nigerian unity, national identity, and democracy. As a result, it is characterized by
unresolved tensions between its nationalist themes, the intentions of the emergent
Nigerian intelligentsia who inherited political power from Britain, and the intentions of
the architect. First, Tange’s fundamental concept for Abuja’s master plan resembles the
plan for Tokyo. One could argue that Tange’s plan to incorporate the Japanese
modermism of Tokyo represented an attempt to meet the needs of Nigerian national
identity; but concerns remained as to whether the architect’s uniform design for the
monumental federal buildings reflected the interests of the emergent Nigerian elite who
inherited political power from Britain, or whether the new structure contributed to the
erasure of certain ethnically based social boundaries. The insistence of the federal
government of Nigeria that Aso Hill be the most prominent object in the Federal Capital

Territory suggests that it was adopting an ancient “pagan” ritual site (Aso Hill) as a
means of reinventing a Nigerian “federal character,” something quite different from the
version of modernity that Tange envisioned. Advocates of the Aso Hill complex
envisioned it as a sign of stability, nationality, and cultural myth making in the vibrant,
new capital city.

Military dictators interpreted Abuja’s master plan as a document that required the
isolation of the Three Arms Zone (as a shrine to power) from the rest of the city to make
it inaccessible for public gathering. The river that runs down the foot of Aso Hill forms a
moat between the central part of the city and the Zone. This moat can be crossed only by
bridge, and the bridge is designed to be easily barricaded in time of civil disturbances.
Hence, marching to the shrine of power, as is the case in most democratic societies, has
been neutralized by the manner in which the master plan was interpreted and
implemented. Any march in the city will stop at the national mall in the central district.
This outcome was not by accident but by the careful intentions of the military dictators
who built Abuja and who deliberately chose to ignore existing traditional urban examples
in Nigeria. The ideology that privileges a landscape that can forge national unity in
Nigeria will face several practical challenges with the national assembly and the civilian
president, who took over power on 29 May 1999 after 15 years of continuous military
dictatorship.

NNAMDI ELLEH
Africa: Northern Africa; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France);
Tange, Kenzo (Japan)

Further Reading
Afigbo, A.E., Owerri, Nigeria: RADA, 1986
Ajayi, LF., Ibadan, Nigeria: Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1984
Elleh, Nnamdi, New York: McGraw Hill, 1997

Lagos, Nigeria: The Federal Capital Development Authority, Federal Republic of Nigeria,
1979
Lagos, Nigeria: s.n., 1975
Vale, Lawrence, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1992

ACOUSTICS

As Charles Garnier prepared the design for the Paris Opera House in 1861, the lack of
acoustical design information and the contradictory nature of the information that he
found forced him to leave the acoustic quality to chance and hope for the best. With few
exceptions, this was the condition of architectural acoustics at the beginning of the 20th
century. In 1900, with the pioneering work of Wallace Clement Sabine, the dark
mysteries of “good acoustics” began to be illuminated. In his efforts to remedy the poor
acoustics in the Fogg Art Museum Lecture Hall (1895-1973) at Harvard University,

Sabine began experiments that revealed the relationship among the architectural materials
of a space, the physical volume of the space, and the time that sound would persist in the
space after a source was stopped (the reverberation time). Predicting the reverberation
time of a room provided the first scientific foundation for reliable acoustic design in
architecture. This method is still regularly used as a benchmark to design a range of
listening environments, from concert halls to school classrooms.

The first application of this new acoustical knowledge occurred during the design of
the Boston Symphony Hall (1906) by McKim, Mead and White. Original plans for the
hall called for an enlarged version of the Leipzig Neues Gewandhaus (1884), a classical
Greek Revival theater. The increased size would have been acoustically inappropriate, as
it doubled the room volume, leading to excessive reverberation. Sabine worked with the
architects to develop a scheme with a smaller room volume in the traditional “shoe box”
concert hall shape. The Boston Symphony Hall remains one of the best in the world.
Adler and Sullivan’s Auditorium Building (1889) in Chicago was praised for its
architectural and engineering achievements as well as for the theater’s superb acoustics.
As the profession of acoustical consulting emerged in the design of listening spaces, the
firm of Bolt, Beranek and Newman made a significant impact on the development of
architectural acoustics in the 20th century. Their work with architects Harrison and
Abramovitz on Avery Fisher Hall (1962) in New York City represented a legitimate
attempt to incorporate new scientific principles of acoustical design rather than merely
copying previous halls that were known to be good. Although it presented several
failures, one key acoustic point gleaned from a study of European halls for Avery Fisher
Hall was that the room should hold 1,400 to 1,800 seats. Yielding to economic pressures,
the architect increased seating to almost 3,000.

A more successful implementation of modern acoustical theories is the Berlin
Philharmonic (1963). Architect Hans Scharoun’s vision of a hall in the round blurs the
traditional distinction between performer and audience. The approach posed quite an
acoustical challenge, given the directionality of many orchestral instruments; it required
an extremely unconventional acoustical design. The resulting “vineyard terrace” seating
arrangement resolved many potential acoustical difficulties while creating a spatial
vitality that resonates outward to form the profile of the building. This collaboration
between Scharoun and the acoustic consultant Lothar Cremer engendered a truly inspired
architectural design.

Possibly inspired by the failure of Avery Fisher Hall and the desire to understand what
went wrong, concert halls, as the crucible for applying sonic theories, gave rise to an
acoustical renaissance in the latter part of the 20th century. Acoustically designed spaces
need high-quality direct sound, strong sound reflections from the ceiling and side wal
surfaces soon after the direct sound, a highly diffuse and controlled reverberance, and
heavy solid sound reflecting materials. Formerly thought to be mutually exclusive, these
sonic properties exist together in the latest halls of the 20th century through an integration
of both historic precedent and new understandings of room acoustics and listening. An
extraordinary example of this union is the 1,840-seat Concert Hall in the Cultura.
Congress Center (1999) in Lucerne, Switzerland, by architect Jean Nouvel and acoustic
consultant Russell Johnson.

New techniques for improved acoustic environments are applied in many building
types, including school classrooms, music practice rooms, church sanctuaries, movie


theaters, transportation hubs, and industrial facilities. Simultaneously, with more and
more exposure to digital-quality sound, clients have become keenly aware of their sonic
environment and expect high levels of performance. Speech intelligibility in classrooms
has been related to learning, with efforts to reduce excessive background noise from
mechanical equipment. The issue has become the focus of a U.S. federal government
assessment and proposal for a nationwide acoustical standard for schools. Additionally,
careful selection of materials, their quantities, and their locations in classrooms are
important to enhance speech intelligibility. Music practice spaces require adequate room
volume with both soundabsorbent and sound-diffusing materials to control loudness and
reduce the risk of noise-induced hearing loss to musicians and teachers. Religious liturgy
relies more heavily on intimate spoken sermons, cathedral-like choir singing, and high-
powered amplified music in many denominations. These trends, coupled with a
prevailing increase in sanctuary size and the desire for more congregational interaction,
have demanded sophisticated sound reinforcement systems and carefully configured
room acoustic design strategies to strike a balance among divergent sonic criteria. Digital
surround sound, the new standard in movie theater entertainment, incorporates the
environmental acoustic character as part of the movie sound track, which should not be
colored by the theater space. This requires very low reverberance, low background noise
levels from mechanical equipment, and exceptional sound isolation from adjacent
theaters. Unintelligible announcements, the bane of transportation hubs, have been the
focus of many recent acoustical studies, affirming the need to consider room geometry,
size, and material selection as they play as great a role as the actual announcement system
itself in the success of these spaces.

Many meaningful advances in acoustic knowledge were made in the 20th century. The
application and integration of this information within architectural design leaves much
room for advancement. Alvar Aalto’s famous acoustical ray tracing diagrams for the
lecture room of the Viipuri Public Library (1933-35) in Viipuri, Finland, represent
acoustical thinking in the earliest phases of design. Developing sophisticated methods to
assimilate newer acoustical knowledge as part of the architectural design process is the
work at hand in the 21st century.

MARTIN A.GOLD

Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Adler, David (United States); Church; Concert Hall;

Harrison, Wallace K., and Max Abramovitz (United States); Library, McKim, Mead and
White (United States); Nouvel, Jean (France)

Further Reading

Barren, Michael, London and New York: Spon, 1993

Beranek, Leo, “Acoustical Consultation: Brief History before 1960,” in New York:
Acoustical Society of America, 1994

Cavanaugh, William J., and Joseph A. Wilkes (editors), New York: Wiley, 1999

Egan, M. David, © New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988

Fitch, James Marston, and William Bobenhausen, New York: Oxford University Press,
1999

Harris, Cyril M. (editor), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957; 3rd revised edition, as New

York: McGraw-Hill, 1991

Mehta, Madan, James Johnson, and Jorge Rocafort, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey:
Prentice Hall, 1999

ADAPTIVE RE-USE

Buildings often outlive their function; however, their inherent durability often gives the
building another life. There is a long tradition of buildings being adapted to suit new
functions. Roman basilicas were converted to serve as worship spaces for the nascent
Christian church. In medieval times, Roman fortifications were resurrected to form part
of the fabric of the mercantile cities. It was not until the advent of ready demolition and
the mechanization of the building process during the Industrial Revolution that the
practice of adapting old buildings to new uses became less the norm.

Following World War IL the pace of change in urban form, precipitated by
technological advances and social upheavals, quickened. As buildings became obsolete
and shifting land values directed economic development away from central cities,
particularly in North America, large-scale demolition became commonplace. In some
cases, well-built warehouses and industrial structures stood on land that had become
more valuable for other commercial and office uses, further accelerating demolition.
Housing that stood in the pathway of proposed highways was also torn down. Urban
renewal stopped short of its promise, and vacant buildings quickly became vacant land.
To combat these failures, preservation strategies were developed that employed the
existing built environment to suit new uses.

There are four distinct building types in which adaptive re-use of older structures can
be seen. Public buildings, which includes large transportation facilities like train stations
and civic buildings built in the 19th and 20th centuries being converted to new public and
private uses. Industrial buildings, with their large clear structural spans and, typically,
large expanses of windows or skylight, lend themselves particularly well to housing an
enormous variety of new use groups. Private buildings, like large houses, can serve
multiple functions because of the inherent flexibility of the prototype. Finally,
commercial buildings, the structures that are so emblematic of the advances in
architectural technology in the 20th century, are being recycled with different uses,
presenting unique preservation problems, as architects must address issues related to
preserving buildings that employed contemporary technology.

The U.S. government owns many magnificent historic structures and has taken the
lead in finding new uses for its stock of buildings, serving as an example for private
sector development. In Washington, D.C., the Pension Building, an imposing brick
edifice, was constructed shortly after the Civil War to provide office space for agencies
distributing pensions to war veterans and their families. Its primary distinctive feature is a
large, central skylit atrium space that allows the ring of offices access to natural light.
The building stood dormant for many years until a major restoration project started in
1984 enabled the National Building Museum to occupy the lower floors of the building,
with the bulk of the building retained for government offices. The soaring splendor of the

building’s interior serves as an excellent advertisement of its function as a museum for
the built environment.

Also in Washington, D.C., is the Old Post Office Building, another atrium building.
Completed in 1899, the neoRomanesque building was almost demolished in the early
1970s. Fortunately, as a result of the dedicated efforts of local preservationists and the
daunting cost of demolishing such a huge structure, the building was renovated in 1978.
The three lower levels of the building, including the atrium, were converted to restaurants
and retail, with the perimeter of the building on the upper level retained as office space.

One of the most well-known re-uses of a dormant train station is Gae Aulenti’s
remaking of the in Paris as the national museum of art and civilization. Originally
opened for train traffic in 1900, both the building’s short platform lengths and changes in
travel patterns lead to the abandonment of the station shortly after World War II.
Reopened as a museum in 1986, the renovation makes use of the original attached hotel
within the head house as exhibition space. Built within the volume of the train shed are
smaller structures that house more intimate display space for sculpture. Despite the
somewhat awkward intrusion of these galleries within the shed, the sense of the original
great volume of the space is still preserved.

In the United States, the nation’s private railroad system developed a legacy of
magnificent structures throughout the country. When train traffic declined following
World War II, these buildings, centrally located in the downtowns of virtually every
American city, sometimes were virtually abandoned or, worse, torn down in the case of
McKim, Mead and White’s Pennsylvania Station in New York. Union Station in St.
Louis (Theodore C.Link), built in 1894 and renovated and modified in the early 1980s, is
a good example of an important building restored to a new life. The barrel-vaulted Grand
Hall functions in much the same way as it was originally intended, now serving as a hotel
lobby and entrance to a multiuse complex that includes a parking garage and a restaurant
and retail center within the former train shed. The shed, the largest of its type ever built,
is organized into “neighborhoods” to make the integration of the building’s multiple
functions more coherent. When Union Station was renovated, the ornate and eclectic
spaces within the head house were restored and glass was inserted into the vaulted train
shed, flooding the interior with natural light.

In Philadelphia, a large commuter train station built for the Reading Railroad in 1893
became redundant in 1984 when a subterranean tunnel was constructed below it, linking
the area’s railways to a regional network. The beautiful steel and glassvaulted shed and
Renaissance revival terra-cotta facade were empty for several years as several different
alternatives were studied for a possible re-use. Critical to the success of the project was
the maintenance of the historic food market below the train shed. The Pennsylvania
Convention Center, built in 1992 (Thompson, Ventulett, Stainback and Association),
incorporates the Reading Terminal into the new construction, maintaining both this vital
piece of urban architecture and the market’s social importance in the city fabric. The head
house serves as the ceremonial entrance for the convention center as well as a hotel. The
train shed links the entrance from the principal street to the new large convention center
that spans over two adjacent blocks.

The first International Style skyscraper, the PSFS Building (George Howe and
William Lescaze), also in Philadelphia, was constructed in 1932 and served for many
years as the headquarters for a local bank and office building. The building had retail on


the ground floor with a cool modern banking hall on the second floor. After the bank
went out of business in the early 1990s, the building stayed dormant for many years.
Despite the high esteem held for the building locally, its relatively small floor plate did
not attract the interest of businesses seeking space where the need for a large floor
negated the desire to have ready access for natural light. Fortunately for the building,
developers converted it to a hotel that uses the original banking hall as a multipurpose
room. The former retail space now serves as a ground floor lobby and restaurant. The
renovation is truly successful and the building retains its landmark neon sign, first lit to
advertise the bank during the depths of the Depression.

Private buildings that have been adaptively re-used range in size and character from
urban townhouses to urban palaces and castles set alone in the countryside. Museums are
the most common new use for these buildings, often commemorating the house and
holdings of the original occupant, as in the Hearst Castle in San Simeon, California, and
the Biltmore House in Asheville, North Carolina. Alternatively, the urban mansions are
often converted to art museums, making use of the variety of spaces, both small and
grand. Institutions like the CooperHewitt Museum in the former Carnegie mansion and
the Frick Museum, both in New York City, serve as excellent display space for sculpture
and paintings of all manners of style and size. In European countries like France, Spain,
and Portugal, chateaus and castles have been converted into hotels. The Spanish
government, in particular, has made the conversions of these castles into for the latter
half of the 20th century a matter of restoration policy.

Industrial buildings offer the most flexible typology for conversion. Mills and old
factory structures are typically solidly built and often offer large expanses of natural light.
Industrial buildings are generally anonymous buildings that, in the early part of the 20th
century, were executed, if not by architects, then by highly competent vernacular
builders. The prototype was a relatively recent phenomenon, and the pace of construction
of these buildings accelerated during the time of great urban industrialization that
coincided with a particularly eclectic period in architecture. Consequently, these
buildings hold important social and physical significance in the urban context. The solid
structures of these buildings may have contributed to their longterm survival; in some
cases, the cost of demolition made their destruction not as viable an option, allowing time
for alternative uses to be found.

Housing has been a popular choice to occupy these spaces. In the United States, the
vanguard of the movement to convert former industrial properties to housing was the
SoHo neighborhood in New York City. What started as flexible and inexpensive space
serving as artist studios became coveted by those looking for expansive living quarters in
neighborhoods that the artists had helped to become fashionable. Outside of New York,
one of the better-known early preservation and conversion projects is Lowell Mills in
Lowell, Massachusetts, a mixed-use complex that helped to revitalize a portion of that
moribund town.

These mill buildings are now also adapted to house the industries of the information
age, the economic successor to the industrial revolution. Offices for computer technology
firms, professional offices, and material and product showrooms in early 20th-century
industrial loft buildings are such a commonplace sight in urban centers that it is often
forgotten that those buildings were not originally constructed to house those functions.
One particularly striking conversion is the Templeton Factory in Glasgow, Scotland, a

former carpet mill built in a colorful and stylized Venetian Gothic style in 1898. The
building complex was considered for demolition following its abandonment in 1978 as
the result of changes in manufacturing technology. Preservation as a museum was
rejected. In the early 1980s, a scheme was devised to convert the building into a hybrid
research and business incubator center run by a local government development agency.

Winston Churchill’s aphorism—‘We shape our buildings; thereafter they shape us”—
rings true. Preservationists seeking to link the past with the future take exception to this
rule as we continue to shape our buildings, adapting them to new functions. Adaptive re-
use as a tool used by architects, like the larger preservation movement, is a 20th-century
phenomenon. The preservation of older buildings by giving them new uses also serves as
part of an overall strategy for urban designers, city planners, and the consortium of public
and private forces that view this approach as a tool of economic development. The supply
of older and significant buildings is a source of sound urban ecological regeneration. As
preservation practice evolves, the emphasis is shifting away from strict restoration to an
attitude that frees the building from its former use.

SCOTT KALNER
Aulenti, Gae (Italy); Howe, George, and William Lescaze (United States); McKim,
Mead, and White (United States); Pennsylvania Station, New York

Further Reading
Burchell, Robert W., New Brunswick, New Jersey: CUPR Press, 1981
Cantacuzino, Sherban, New York: Abbeville Press Publishers, 1989
Collins, Richard, A-Bruce Dotson, and Elizabeth B.Masters, Washington, D.C.: Preservation
Press, 1991
Diamonstein, Barbara, New York: Harper & Row, 1978
Fitch, James Marston, New York: McGraw-Hill Publishers, 1982
Greer, Nora Richter, Gloucester, Massachusetts: Rockport Publishers, Inc., 1998
Lee, Antoinette (editor), Washington, D.C.: Preservation Press, 1992
Lee, Vinny, and Ray Main, San Francisco: Soma Publishing, 2000
Moore, Arthur Cotton, New York: McGraw Hill Publishing Company, 1998
artners for Livable Communities (editor), New York: McGraw Hill Professional Publishing
Company, 2000
owell, Kenneth, New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1999
Stratton, Michael (editor), London: E & FN Spon, 2000
Tyler, Norman, New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 1999

ADLER, DAVID 1882-1949

Architect, United States

David Adler, a proponent of Paris’s Ecole des Beaux-Arts and its classical teachings
of symmetry, balance, and superb proportions and an all-inclusive plan whereby a
building relates to its surroundings, was one of America’s most important great-house

architects. Born to Isaac David, a prosperous second-generation wholesale clothier, and
his wife, Theresa Hyman, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Adler was educated at the
Lawrenceville School and Princeton University. After graduating from Princeton in 1904,
Adler moved to Europe, where he traveled extensively and studied architecture at the
Polytechnikum (1904-06) in Munich and at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts (1908-11), whose
curriculum included lessons in structural and technical applications. However, because
Adler was interested exclusively in design, he returned to the United States without
mastering these key assignments, bringing with him a collection of 500 picture postcards
that documented the important architecture and gardens he had seen and to which he
referred throughout his 38-year career.

Before venturing out on his own, Adler apprenticed in Chicago in the office of
Howard Van Doren Shaw, a devotee of the Arts and Crafts movement. Shaw (1869—
1926) was among the most prolific country house architects on Chicago’s North Shore,
particularly in Lake Forest, where Adler also forged his eminent reputation.

Henry C.Dangler, Adler’s closest friend from the Ecole and the person who introduced
Adler to Katherine Keith, whom he married in 1916, also worked in Shaw’s office. Adler
and Dangler did not stay long with Shaw; they decided to form their own partnership.
Dangler left first, and Adler remained with Shaw only until he completed the design of
his first house (1911), which was for uncle and benefactor Charles A.Stonehill, in the
North Shore community of Glencoe. Stonehill had paid for his nephew’s living expenses
while he was studying in Europe.

The Stonehill house, a Louis XIII-style building inspired by the Chateau de Balleroy
in Normandy, set the tone for what became a recognizable trait of Adler’s exemplary
oeuvre. Symmetry guided the house’s entrance facade of pink brick, limestone trim, and
offsetting tall windows and steeply pitched roof. Perched on a high bluff overlooking
Lake Michigan, Adler’s first charge was one of the most outstanding country houses in
Chicago. Unfortunately, the house, with its classically detailed interiors furnished in
Mediterranean pieces, was razed during the early 1960s.

Among the most important houses executed by the AdlerDangler partnership was its
first country house (1912), for Ralph H.Poole, in Lake Bluff, Illinois. With this
commission, Adler brought the Loire valley to the Illinois prairie, designing a Louis XV-
style chateau that perpetuated, with its symmetrical facade of low horizontal lines rising
to a slate mansard roof, classical French architecture. Inside the house, a checker-floored
entrance hall led to the principal rooms: living porch, library, living room, music room,
and dining room, all arranged enfilade across the entire length of the house, another
indication that Adler understood French design.

Henry Dangler’s death in 1917 left both a personal and a professional void in Adler’s
life, for he had lost not only his partner but also his best friend. Adler was not certified to
practice architecture in Illinois; he obtained a New York license in 1917. Although Adler
was the designer, the signature on his plans had always been Dangler’s. Therefore, Adler
was compelled to sit for the Illinois exam, and as presaged by his incomplete studies at
the Ecole, he failed. Adler had already built 17 houses, in French, Georgian, and
Mediterranean styles, but he was forced to find another architect who could replace
Dangler professionally. The solution came in another former associate from Shaw’s
office, Robert Work. Their association, marking the second phase of Adler’s career, was
strictly one of convenience.


While associated with Work, Adler applied the styles of his early houses but also
added to his eclectic oeuvre early American, South African Dutch colonial, and a
modernist design inspired by Viennese architect Josef Hoffmann (1870-1956). Of these
three styles, it was the house in early American (1926) for William McCormick Blair in
Lake Bluff that deviated from Adler’s usual approach to design. The irregular massing of
colonial architecture, whereby a house grows larger over time, dictated the asymmetrical
design for the Blairs. Although the house was built all at once, Adler’s adaptation
flawlessly suggested an organic progression of growth from the principal block, shingled
and gambrel roofed, to the appended wings.

Adler’s largest undertaking was also completed during the mid-1920s. Castle Hill, the
imposing English manor house (1925) for Richard T.Crane Jr, in Ipswich,
Massachusetts, with its pedimented entrance pavilion, balustraded hip roof, and crowning
cupola, followed closely the architecture of 17th-century England, particularly the work
of Sir Christopher Wren (1632-1723) and the Wren-like Belton House (1689). Adler’s
ability lay not only in his proficient design but also in his choice of small Holland brick
with a soft pink patina that softened the imposing scale of the house, rising at the foot of
a 160-foot-wide aisle of grass that undulated toward the Atlantic Ocean.

Adler built 16 houses during the second phase of his career, including a Louis XVI-
style townhouse (1921) for Joseph and Annie Ryerson in Chicago. The Ryerson
townhouse, a classically elegant building—with its symmetrical limestone facade,
crowning mansard roof, and period detailing—was Adler’s only townhouse design in the
French style (Adler built eight townhouses during his career).

By 1929, because Adler had practiced as a principal architect for ten years, he became
eligible for Illinois’s oral examination, which he passed, therefore ending his 12-year
association with Robert Work. Unfortunately, Adler’s professional achievement was
marred by personal tragedy. In May 1930 Katherine (1893-1930), his wife of 14 years,
was killed in an automobile accident while she and Adler were motoring on a rain-slick
road in Normandy. Adler sustained only minor physical injuries, but he was extremely
distraught.

Regardless of this setback, the late 1920s through the mid19308 resulted in the
culmination of Adler’s career, starting with his masterpiece: the Cotswold-influenced
house of Celia Tobin Clark in Hillsborough, California, called House-on-Hill (1930).
Here, Adler created a house that, despite its underlying grandeur and nearly 400 acres of
property, was inconspicuous and unpretentious. For example, because Adler nestled
House-on-Hill into the hillside of its vast property, from the entrance forecourt it
appeared to be only one-and-a-half stories. The house’s full magnitude became apparent
only at the back, from the south terrace, where Adler’s most outstanding elevation—an
Elizabethan half-timbered facade of oak and intricately patterned brick nogging—rose
majestically, as if it grew from the landscape.

House-on-Hill (Celia Tobin Clark
House), Hillsborough, California,
designed by David Adler (1930)

Ezra Stoller © Esto

Inside the Clark house, a beamed and oak-paneled reception gallery, floored in a
harlequin-patterned black-and-white marble tile, opened into the house’s principal stair
hall. Here, a monumental and skillfully carved staircase gave the first indication of the
opulence of House-on-Hill. Because the reception gallery was on the second floor, the
staircase, with its substantial balustrade, led downstairs to an impressive procession of
rooms: library, music room, and dining room. Warmth and comfort pervaded the library,
whose antique pine paneling, Grinling Gibbon’s overmantel, and pegged parquetry were
imported from Europe. In the commodious and imposing music room, classically detailed
spruce walls served as foundation for a high plaster ceiling with its patterns of rosettes,
garlands, and musical instruments, while in the dining room, panels of hand-painted | 8th-
century Chinese wallpaper were framed by exquisite woodwork in sugar pine.

Another outstanding design from this period was the Pennsylvania Dutch-style
Georgian for Helen Shedd Reed (1931), unquestionably Adler’s finest house on the North
Shore. The Reed house, consisting of a center block balanced by a pair of wings, was
sited beyond a grass forecourt with a small pool and surrounding U-shaped gravel drive
and exemplified the symmetry, balance, and elegance of Adler’s work. The house’s
shimmering dark gray mica stone also added to its magnificence.

The interior of the Reed house was the most important collaboration between Adler
and his sister, interior decorator Frances Elkins (1888-1953). Adler and Elkins were
extremely close, and during his tenure in Paris, she traveled with him,


Freestanding staircase, Mrs. Kersey
Coates Reed House, by David Adler
(1931)

Ezra Stoller © Esto

meeting several avant-garde artisans, including Jean-Michel Frank (1895-1941), the
French interior decorator, and furniture designer, and Alberto Giacometti (1902-85), the
sculptor who designed furniture for Frank. Nowhere is Elkins’s relationship with these
designers more apparent than in the Reed house, where Adler’s skilled architecture
guided the most notable interiors of her career. Elkins lived in California, and although
she worked independently of her brother, they collaborated on at least 16 commissions,
undoubtedly her best work, from 1919 until 1949, when Adler died unexpectedly of a
heart attack.

The Reed house’s interiors blended the traditional and the avant-garde, starting in the
entrance hall, where a slick blackand-white marble floor led to the ladies’ powder room,
the gentlemen’s cloakroom, and the gallery. In the gallery, stately black Belgian marble
columns framed the crowning element of the interior: a dramatic, freestanding staircase
of ebony and wrought-glass spindles. The gallery led to each of the principal rooms:
living room, library, and dining room, all aligned overlooking Lake Michigan.


Adler gave each of these rooms his usual dose of exquisite and brilliantly executed
detailing. In the living room and dining room, a dentiled cornice, as well as mantels and
door casings, all intricately carved, complemented Elkins’s selection of English antiques
and accoutrements, including the dining room’s hand painted Chinese wallpaper. In the
library, although the most avant-garde room in the house, walls of tan Hermés goatskin
and leather-upholstered furnishings by Frank were adroitly tempered by Adler’s
traditional foundation: antique French parquetry, a finely carved fireplace mantel, and
doors and casings, resulting in the perfectly balanced eclecticism for which he was
renowned.

Any discussion of the Reed commission would be remiss without mentioning the
tennis house that Adler designed several years before the main house. Located at the foot
of the formal gardens, across the street from the main house, the Georgian building, with
its central lounge, his-and-hers changing rooms, and second-floor bedrooms, was
ingeniously sited at the edge of a ravine, allowing Adler to reduce the apparent scale of
the mammoth building by positioning the court ten feet below ground level. The end
result: a sunken indoor court where natural light flooded the space through a pitched glass
roof, creating, along with interior ivy-covered walls, the illusion of an outdoor setting.

The mid-1930s signaled the end to Adler’s career as an architect of the great house.
Adler’s declining health from a riding accident in 1935, as well as altered economic
conditions in the United States, prompted him to adapt to designing smaller, less grand
houses and to spend more time executing apartment interiors and the alterations and
additions that had always been a part of his demanding schedule.

Adler’s last house (he built 45 houses, 18 of which were located outside of the
Chicago area), in Pebble Beach, California, was designed for Paul and Ruth Winslow
(1948). Built low to the ground, one storied, and sided in flush boards painted white, the
Winslow house consisted of a central living room balanced by two symmetrical wings:
the dinmg room and service wing and the master bedroom wing. Despite the house’s
modest size, Adler’s last house was one that exemplified his ability to create grandeur
and elegance, albeit on a much smaller scale.

STEPHEN SALNY
Arts and Crafts Movement; Shaw, Howard Van Doren (United States); Historicism

Selected Works

Charles A. Stonehill House, Chicago, Illinois, 1911 Ralph H.Poole House, Lake Bluff,
Illinois (with Henry Dangler), 1912

Castle Hill, Ipswich, Massachusetts, 1925 William McCormick Blair House, Lake
Bluff, Iinois (with Robert Work), 1926

House-on-Hill (Celia Tobin Clark House), Hillsborough, California, 1930

Helen Shedd Reed House, Lake Forest, Illinois (with Frances Elkins), 1931

Further Reading

Hampton, Mark, New York: Doubleday, 1992

Pratt, Richard, New York: M. Evans and Company, 1970
Salny, Stephen M., New York: W.W.Norton, 2001

AEG TURBINE FACTORY

Designed by Peter Behrens and Karl Bernhard; completed 1910

Berlin, Germany

Largely misunderstood by the historians of the Modern movement who celebrated it as
the first major work of frank industrial architecture endowed with exceptional “functional
directness,” the AEG Turbine Factory—designed by Peter Behrens and Karl Bernhard
and completed 1910—remains the most admired and most influential of Behrens’s works.

Designed between 1908 and 1909 for the Allgemeine Elektricitats Gesesells (AEG)—
a German electrical concern founded by Emil Rathenau in 1883—the factory was placed
strategically at the southern edge of the factory complex along Huttenstrasse and
Berlichingenstrasse, facing Berlin and the world as a show front of the prosperous
industrial magnate. Complying with such expectations and following his own ideological
stance, Behrens built a magnificent iron and glass hybrid of two eminently classical
temple traditions—the Greek and the Egyptian—meant to glorify industrial might.

In accepting the challenge of designing his first industrial building, Behrens’s concern
was not to recast all of architecture in terms of industry and the machine, as was most
often the case with the next generation of modern architects. Rather, “his concern
was...levating so dominant a societal force as the factory to the level of established
cultural standard” (see Anderson, 1977).

As an adept of the Austrian art historian and critic Alois Riegel’s theory of (literally,
“artistic will” or the evolutionary force of style) and of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s
aesthetic historicism, exemplified in the concept of the Zeitgeist, Behrens applied in the
design of the Turbine Factory the principles that he had evolved as the leader of the
Darmstadt artists’ colony after 1901. In direct opposition to Gottfried Semper’s
“materialism,” central to Behrens’s approach was belief in the force of the artist, and art,
to transform brute everyday life into a dignified existence. Akin to the carbon
transformed under extreme conditions into a praised diamond, everyday life—and in this
case raw industry, the factory, and the machine—could be transformed under the artist’s

into an entity of high culture. Such an ideological position, applied to industry, spread
into a number of aesthetic and symbolic themes clearly reflected in the Turbine Factory.
Far from depending on primary concerns for material, technical, and functional purposes,
the factory was, in Behrens’s mind, the result of a specific concretization of selected
industrial features, filtered through the artist’s transcendental will to form. The result was
a vast crystal symbolizing the victory of art over the banality of life in an emerging
machine society. If the industrial fact at hand could not be ignored, it was not the role of
the artist to succumb to it helplessly, either. It is largely because of this position that
Behrens’s first industrial building was unprecedented in industrial architecture and
design.


In aesthetic terms, the central conflict that Behrens faced in the design of the Turbine
Factory was the tectonic character of the ferro-vitreous wide span offered by his engineer,
Karl Bernhard, as the necessary solution for mastering the vastness of the structure and
Behrens’s adherence to the concept of since his 1905 pavilions at the Oldenburg
Northwest German Art Exhibition. The challenge was, therefore, to find a solution that
would be flexible enough to accommodate the dictates of a particular technology—
including the use of given industrial materials—while preserving architecture as the
eminent symbol of established cultural values of a modern capitalist state. The
culmination of this synthetic process was expressed in the factory’s triumphal templelike
facade with its crystalline central window of staggering dimensions that only advanced
technology could have brought about.

With his limited knowledge of any kind of building technology, Behrens had to rely
on the support of an engineer for such a vast and technically complex building. The
shifting priorities between ideology and technology in the conception of the building
necessarily resulted in a series of ambiguities and concealments that Behrens provoked
rather than avoided in a strained collaboration with Bernhard.

The structural makeup of the factory consists of an asymmetrical three-hinged arch
reinforced by a transversal tie-rod. The longer half of the arch springs vertically up to the
second hinge and then breaks in three facets before reaching the third hinge at the apex of
the arch. In properly structural terms, there was no reason for breaking the second arm
into segments. The decision was a willful intervention in the engineer’s work by Behrens
the artist. Historically, a variety of reasons have been advanced as an explanation for such
a move. Whereas Kenneth Frampton, for example, refers to a rather improbable desire to
create the shape of a farmer’s barn with its typical polygonal gable, Reyner Banham
offers a technological explanation: the need for clearance for the huge internal traveling
crane—even though the section shows that the tying rods forced the crane to run much
lower.

The chiseled gable was, in fact, the result of two specific exigencies of Behrens’s the
urge for enforced and the evocation of (sign), the crystalline symbol of life as art.
Indeed, the comparison between Behrens’s earlier representation of the priestess of
Darmstadt carrying the redemptive crystal high above her head, as well as the majestic
front of the temple-factory, remforces the idea of a crystalshaped gable springing high
above the ground in delicate balance over the equally crystalline abstracted robe of a
priestess.

Furthermore, using the given technology for more ambitious aims, Behrens concealed
the fact that the actual structural system of the factory was made up of a series of hinged
arches by capping the building with a voluminous cornice cutting the arch at the top of its
vertical member. In so doing, Behrens created the visual impression of a trabeated system
in which the vertical members of the arches represented so many columns of a classical
temple. By the same token, the somewhat inwardly inclined glazed surfaces between the
structural members of the side elevation, along with the blown-up roofline and the
massive concrete nonbearing “corner stones” wrapping around a streamlined trapezoida
silhouette, created a convincing case of a perfectly “stereotomic” volume inflated with
space. Thus undermining the iron framing, Behrens prevented the construction from
dematerializing into a dispersed tectonic grid—as would have been the case with the
Dutert-Contamin Gallerie des Machines—and clearly subverted any engineering


directness. The formulation of a symbolic structure, however, did not preclude Behrens
from addressing forcefully the nature and purpose of the building.

AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin,
designed by Peter Behrens with Karl
Bernhard (1910)

© Alan Windsor

Still remaining in the realm of powerful symbolism, Behrens allowed the function of the
building to express itself allegorically not only through the exclusive use of industrial
materials on a large scale but also by evoking forcefully the dominant societal role of the
machine in the most memorable details of the building, such as the giant base hinges of
the arches set on high concrete pedestals. As has been noted, what makes the significance
and the importance of the AEG Turbine Factory, aside from actual achievement, “is that
Behrens understood that the established cultural standards must be transformed in the
process of assimilating modern industry.”
DANILO UDOVICKI-SELB
Banham, Reyner (United States); Behrens, Peter (Ger-many); Darmstadt, Germany;
Frampton, Kenneth (United States); Modernism

Further Reading

Anderson, Stanford, “Moder Architecture and Industry: Peter Behrens and the Cultural Politics of
Historical Determinism,” 11 (Winter 1977)

Anderson, Stanford, “Modern Architecture and Industry: Peter Behrens, the AEG, and Industrial
Design,” 21 (Summer 1980)

Buddensieg, Tilmann, with Henning Rogge, Berlin: Mann, 1979; as translated by Iain
Boyd Whyte, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1984

Buderath, Bernhard, with Tilmann Buddensieg (editors), Frankfurt: Prestel, 1990

Le Corbusier, La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland: Haefeli, 1912; reprint, New York: Da Capo
Press, 1968

Dohrn, W., “Das Vorbild der AEG,” 3 (3 September 1909)

Giedion, Sigfried, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, and London:

Oxford University Press, 1941; 5th edition, revised and enlarged, Cambridge, Massachusetts:

Harvard University Press, 1967

Kadatz, Hans-Joachim, Leipzig: Seemann, 1977
Kalkschmidt, E., “Deutsches Kunstgewerbe und der Weltmarkt,” 19 (July 1911)
evsner, Nikolaus, London: Faber, 1936; revised edition, as London: Penguin,
1975

AFRICA: NORTHERN AFRICA

Compared with the rest of the continent, the countries of North Africa form an
immediately recognizable region and appear as a more cohesive bloc than do their
neighbors south of the Sahara Desert. They derive their apparent cohesion from a
common language (Arabic), a common religion (Islam), and a shared cultural identity as
heirs of the Ottoman Empire. Like their sub-Saharan neighbors, all shared the historical
experience of European colonialism and of the struggle for independence. Unlike their
sub-Saharan neighbors, however, pan-Arabism has been a more powerful force than
African unity.

On closer examination, all the countries of North Africa have developed their own
distinctive cultural identity and historic perception of themselves and their role in the
world. Egypt, with its overpowering legacy of its Pharaonic past and its small but
influential Coptic Christian minority, has always perceived itself as distinctively different
from the Maghreb (the countries to the west) and more naturally internationalist in
outlook. Morocco, which was the only country in North Africa that did not suffer the
experience of Ottoman rule, prided itself on the purity of its national culture and the
dignity of its sultanate.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the Ottoman Empire was collapsing all around
the Mediterranean: Its final death throes came after it allied itself with the German and
AustroHungarian Empires at the beginning of World War I. Egypt had effectively
become a protectorate of Britain in 1882, to the intense annoyance of France, which had
enjoyed most-favorednation status in Egypt since Napoleon’s short-lived expedition to
Egypt in 1799-1801. Algeria (or at least the coastal strip) became a French colony in
1830, to which the mountainous hinterland and the desert interior were added in 1848,
and by 1900 it was effectively part of metropolitan France. Tunisia, as a consequence of
the dey of Tunis’s indebtedness to French bankers, was annexed by France in 1881. The
Sudan, over which vast territory British troops had campaigned sporadically for 20 years,
was absorbed into the British Empire in 1899 as an Anglo-Egyptian condominium. Libya
was invaded by Italy and incorporated into the infant Italian Empire in 1912; in the same

year, Morocco became a protectorate of France by treaty, proudly safeguarding its
cultural independence as the brightest jewel in the French imperial crown.

The European colonial experience was, with the exception of Algeria, short-lived and,
again with the exception of Algeria, relatively bloodless. Egypt gained its independence
in 1922 under the Albanian dynasty, whose founder, Mohammed Ali, had seized power
from the Ottomans and imposed himself as khedive on the long-suffering Egyptian
people in 1805, shortly after Napoleon’s expedition to Egypt. Effective independence
was not really secured until the revolution under General Neguib and until Colone
Nasser overthrew King Farouk and seized power in 1952. With the exception of Algeria,
all other North African states gained their independence in the 1950s: Algeria, after a
long, bloody civil war between the European settlers (10 percent of the population) and
the indigenous Africans, finally followed suit in 1962. (A couple of insignificant Spanish
enclaves on the Mediterranean coast of Morocco still owe allegiance to Europe.)

For the first half of the 20th century, the architectural and urban development of North
Africa was European directed and European driven. At the beginning of the century,
European imperialism was at its apogee, and between 1900 and the outbreak of World
War I in 1914, with a few significant exceptions, colonial governments, architects, and
developers aimed to recreate Europe in Africa. By 1900 regionalism and vernacular
revivalism had become respectable, even fashionable, architectural styles in Europe in a
period when eclecticism reigned.

Physical manifestations of imperialistic rule, such as the Union Jack-inspired town
plan of the new capital of the Sudan (Khartoum) and the Hausmannesque boulevards
imposed on the organic city plan of Algiers were characteristic of this period but by no
means were universal. Equally popular were the garden suburb, garden city developments
that were fashionable in Europe: the Garden Suburb along the Nile in Cairo, the more
ambitious New Town of Heliopolis on the desert fringe of the same city, and the Parc
d’Hydra and the hilly suburbs of El Biar in Algiers were laid out in European lines for a
mainly European settler population.

(Arabism) and the Hispano-Mauresque Revival were eagerly adopted by French
architects in Algeria, as the Saracenic, Coptic, and even Pharaonic styles were adopted by
the polyglot architects practicing in Egypt.

Representative buildings of the pre-World War I period, when European imperialism
reigned supreme, were the Post Office (1890-1900, Algiers) by Tondoir and Voinot, the
Galerie Algerienne (1902, Algiers) by Voinot, and the Prefecture (1904, Algiers) and the
Hotel St. Georges (1910; now the Hotel El Djezair, Algiers), all in a highly decorative
and stylized part Ottoman, part Hispano-Mauresque style inspired by the wealth of
handsome 18th-century Ottoman buildings in the city. Also representative, in Cairo, are
the eclectically classicist Egyptian Museum (1900), the vernacular revivalist Coptic
Museum (1910), and the Beaux-Artian, symmetrically planned buildings of the Cairo
University (founded as Fuad University in 1908); in Khartoum, the neo-Byzantine
Anglican All Saints’ Cathedral (1909-12) by Robert Weir Schulz and the late Ottoman-
style Gordon Memorial College ( 1905; now the University of Khartoum) by Fabricius
Bey and Gorringe are representative.

Lieutenant Gorringe was a British army officer serving with the Royal Engineers;
Fabricius Bey was architect to the khedive in Cairo and of southern European (probably
Maltese) origin. Under the autocratic rule of Lord Cromer, British consul-general in


Egypt from 1883 to 1907, whose job title concealed the virtually absolute power he
wielded, Cairo and Alexandria were boom cities, and architects and engineers flocked to
Egypt from all over Europe. The indigenous Egyptian elite—the educated middle classes
who had enjoyed a privileged position in society under the Francophile rule of Khedive
Ismail before the British invasion of Egypt in 1882—were increasingly sidelined under
Cromer’s administration and agitated for a national university and for a school of fine arts
under Egyptian control. The foundation of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in 1906 and of Fuad
University in 1908 were the results of their efforts. By 1920 both institutions (now the
University of Helwan at Zamalek and Cairo University, respectively) had schools of
architecture. Not until the 1920s, therefore, were indigenous Egyptians able to study
architecture in their own country. The few Egyptian architects who were in practice in the
early decades of the century had studied abroad at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris or at
Constantinople. A similar situation prevailed throughout North Af-

Regional Military Hospital (1982),
Marrakesh, designed by Charles
Boccaro

Photo by Christian Lignon © Aga
Khan Trust for Culture

rica: not until the Ecole Polytechnique d’ Architecture et Urbanisme (EPAU) was founded
in Algiers after World War II were there any schools of architecture in North Africa
outside Egypt. Inevitably, it was well into the second half of the century before
indigenous African architects were able to make a major contribution to the physical
development of their homelands.

If the period before World War I was the high point of European imperialism, the
period between the world wars was the decline of empire; however, the architectural and

urban development of North Africa was still almost entirely European driven. Morocco,
under its first French resident-general, Hubert Lyautey (1912-25), pursued a clear-
sighted policy of state intervention in urban development (as did Libya) after Benito
Mussolini seized power in Italy in 1922 and sought to revive the splendors of Rome’s
imperial past in Africa.

Marshal Lyautey sought conscientiously to conserve what remained of the Moroccan
architectural heritage—Hispano-Mauresque, Arab, and Berber. He stated, “While in other
parts of North Africa we only found social debris, here...we have found a constituted
empire, and with it a beautiful and great civilization.... A remarkable Morocco can be
created, that will remain Moroccan and Islamic” (quoted in Betts, 1978). However, he
was not averse to contemporary architectural developments: Auguste and Gustave Perret
designed and built the Dock Installations and Warehouses (1915) in Casablanca, but the
cities of Casablanca and Rabat were replanned on grandiloquent lines and had public
buildings that were both neoclassical and embellished with Hispano-Mauresque
decoration, as in the Law Courts (1915) in Casablanca by J.Marrast and the Post Office
(c.1920) in Rabat by J.Laforgue.

The Italian administration showed no such sensitivity in Libya, except toward the
imperial Roman sites. Tripoli was replanned as the colonial capital, and the new town
was created on provincial Italian lines, designed by the architects A.Novello and
O.Cabiatti; in building during the 1920s and 1930s, it was a prototype of Giovanni
Pellegrini’s (1936).

No such high-mindedness drove the architectural development of the other North
African countries. Where appropriate, prevailed, as in the Waqf Ministry Building
(1925) by Mahmould Fahmy Pasha and the Bank Misr (1927) by A. Laseiac in Cairo; in
general, however, North Africa followed European precedents: a pared-down
Neoclassicism in the 1920s with some commercial Art Deco in the downtown streets of
major cities, a tentative adoption of modernism, and the International Style in the 1930s.
Algeria generally set the pace: the Palais du Gouvernement General (1930; now the
Palace of Government) designed by M.J.Guiauchain with A. and G.Perret, the Maison
des Etudiants (1933) by C.Montaland, and the Town Hall (1935) by L.Claro, all in
Algiers, are no less advanced than are their contemporaries in Europe. In addition,
Algiers was the subject of Le Corbusier’s most sustained urban-planning initiatives.
Between 1933 and 1942, he published no fewer than three major plans for the city;
formal concepts first proposed for Algiers were eventually realized elsewhere (such as
the Ministry of Education building in Rio de Janeiro and the UNESCO headquarters in
Paris).

The struggle for independence and the consolidation of power after achieving it
preoccupied the governments of all North African countries during the first decade and a
half after the end of World War II (part of which was fought over North African terrain),
and the series of Arab-Israeli wars, culminating in the disastrous war of 1973 and the
devastation of the Suez Canal Zone, deprived the region of the economic security and
political stability that is a prerequisite for sound and sustained physical development. In
contrast, the final quarter of the century saw massive investment in building and a
transformation of the built environment throughout the region (with the exception of
Sudan, where a civil war has been waging for 20 years).

The provision of adequate housing for the mass of the people has been a major priority
of all governments in the region since independence. The rehousing of immigrant
squatters on the outskirts of all major cities, the protection of the limited areas of fertile
agricultural land from population invasion, the reconstruction of the devastated Suez
Canal cities, and the creation of new towns to accommodate the overflow of population
from the major cities have become major areas of architectural activity. Hassan Fathy
was one of the first North African architects to engage seriously with the problems of
popular housing: his modest book which describes his attempt to create a humane
environment in the resettlement village of New Gourna on the west bank of the Nile at
Thebes in Upper Egypt, has been acclaimed worldwide and has transformed architects’
perceptions of their social responsibility as housing providers. Hassan Fathy was also one
of the pioneers, along with his contemporary Ramses Wissa Wassef, in the revival of
traditional materials, constructional systems, and craft skills. The bulk of his practice,
however, was the design of individual houses and villas for private clients. Abdel Wahid
EI Wakil is an accomplished younger Egyptian architect designing in a similar manner.

Inevitably, however, given the enormous shortfall in housing provision, the emphasis
in most state-funded social housing schemes has been on quantity rather than quality, and
four-, five-, or six-story walk-up blocks of apartments have become the norm. Some
architects have handled such assignments well (for example, Elie Azagury’s apartment
blocks in Rabat and Casablanca [1960s] or Candilis, Josic, Woods and Pons’s residential
estate Sidi-bel-Abbes in Oran, Algeria [1950s]), but the scale of most state housing
schemes necessitates the formation of large international multidisciplinary teams of
architects and engineers, as in the huge new cities in the desert hinterland of Cairo
established by the Egyptian Ministry of Reconstruction, New Communities, and Land
Reclamation in the 1980s: Sadat City, 10th Ramadan City, and 6th October City.

Also in the state sector, major building programs for education and health care have
sought to remedy the neglect of these areas by the colonial authorities and to demonstrate
governments’ commitment to the provision of education and health care for all.
Provincial universities and regional hospitals are perceived as flagships of government
policy, and architects of international reputation are commissioned for major projects
(such as James Cubitt and Partners for the University of Garyounis, Benghazi, Libya;
Oscar Niemeyer for the University of Constantine, Algeria; and Charles Boccara for the
1982 Regional Hospital, Marrakesh, Morocco).

Tourism has generated large downtown hotels and holiday resorts. Good examples of
the latter include work by architects A.Faraoui and P.de Mazieres in Morocco, Fernand
Pouillon in Algeria, and Serge Santelli in Tunisia. In addition, the demands of tourism
undoubtedly generated several major historic and archaeological conservation projects,
the most spectacular being the UNESCO-sponsored re-erection of the temple of Rameses
II at Abu Simbel on an elevated site overlooking Lake Nasser in Upper Egypt.

A major factor that was instrumental in the evident raising of standards of architectural
service and of the quality of architectural design in the last 20 years of the century was
the institution of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture (AKAA). Conservation of the
environment, community involvement in the design decision-making process, and the
appropriateness as well as the quality of the executed design are among the criteria for
selecting buildings for an award. The patronage of the Aga Khan through this award
scheme has both publicized and promoted, as models for other architects to emulate,


several excellent buildings and conservation schemes in North Africa, among them the
Arts Center at Harrania near Giza in Egypt by Wissa Wassef, the revitalization of the
Hafsia quarter of the Medina in Tunis, and the Dar Lamane Housing Community in
Casablanca, Morocco.

Finally, two outstanding buildings that have become icons of their countries’
commitment to excellence in architecture and the arts are the new Cairo Opera House and
Cultural Center (1987-92) on Gezira Island by the Japanese consortium Nikkei Sekkai
Planners Architects and Engineers and the Great Mosque (1986-93) in Casablanca,
commissioned by King Hassan II from the French architect Marcel Pinseau. By way of
postscript, with about 20 schools of architecture in the region at the turn of the
millennium, the 21st century can expect a much higher proportion of buildings in North
Africa to be designed by indigenous architects than was true in the 20th century.
ANTHONY D.C.HYLAND

Aga Khan Award (1977-); Art Deco; Cairo, Egypt; Le Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret,
Charles-Edouard) (France); Egyptian Revival; Fathy, Hassan (Egypt); Hassan II Mosque,
Casablanca; International Style; Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil); Public Housing; Ramses
Wissa Wassef Arts Centre, Giza, Egypt; Wassef, Wissa (Egypt)

Further Reading

Abel, Colin, “Work of El-Wakil” 180 (1986)

Abu-Lughod, Janet L., Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1971

Abu-Lughod, Janet L., Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1980

Béguin, Francois, with Gildas Bandez, Denis Lesage, and Lucien Godin, Paris: Dunod,
1983

Betts, Raymond F., London and New York: Gordon and Cremonesi, 1978

Danby, Miles, London: Phaidon, 1995

Elleh, Nnamdi, New York: McGraw Hill, 1997

Fathy, Hassan, Cairo: Ministry of Culture, 1969; as Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1973

Holod, Renata, and Darl Rastorfer (editors), Millerton, New York: Aperture, 1983

Huet, Bernard, “The Modernity in a Tradition: The Arab Muslim Culture of North Africa,” 10
(1983)

Kultermann, Udo, translated by John Maass, London: Studio Vista, and New York: Braziller,
1969

Kultermann, Udo, “Contemporary Arab Architecture: The Architects of Egypt,” 4 (1982)
Kultermann, Udo, “Contemporary Arab Architecture: The Architects of Algeria, Tunisia, and
Libya,” 9 (1983)
Linstrum, Derek, “The Architecture of the Colonial and Post-Colonial Periods outside Europe:
Africa,” and “The Architecture of the Twentieth Century: Africa,” in 20th edition, edited
by Dan Cruickshank with Andrew-Saint Peter Blundell Jones, Kenneth Frampton, and Fleur
Richard, Oxford and Boston: Architectural Press, 1996
Singapore: Concept Media, 1983

Richards, James Maude, Ismail Serageldin, and Darl Rastorfer, Singapore: Concept Media, and

London: Architectural Press, 1985
Taylor, Brian Brace, “Demythologizing Colonial Architecture,” 13 (1984)


AFRICA: SOUTHERN AND CENTRAL
AFRICA

Architectural expression of the southern subcontinent and eastern seaboard of Africa in
the 20th century resonates with broader international concerns. In the first half of the
century, before decolonization, the regional styling was a direct reflection of that of the
European colonial powers—an embodiment of empire and what architecturally might
appropriately reflect statehood and civic order. After World War II, postcolonial Africa
engaged the international architectural debate.

At the turn of the 20th century, the so-called scramble for Africa by the European
nations had created the geography of the continent, the larger portion of which bore the
pink mapping that demarcated the British Empire. The southeast and south-west
seaboards were flanked by Portuguese East and West Africa (since 1974, Mozambique
and Angola, respectively), which were at that time administered as provinces and not
nations, and German South West (to the south) and East Africa (to the north), now
Namibia (1992) and Tanzania (since 1964; in 1961, Tanganyika), respectively. On the
(flat grasslands above the escarpment) lay two independent Boer republics. While being
the political domain of farmer-pioneers of European extraction of some 200 years before,
their numbers swelled a wave of immigration of the gold rush to the Zuid-Afrikaansche
Republiek (South African Republic) of the 1880s.

The subcontinent, as it entered the 20th century, was heir to the aspirations of one
man, Cecil John Rhodes (1853-1902), with his stated ambition to have the area from the
Cape to Cairo as a dominion of the British Empire. Architecture, through his architect-
protégé Herbert Baker (1862-1946), was to embody the expression of this ambition.
Baker can take credit for coining a style, Cape Dutch Revival, a derivative of the
domestic baroque of white-walled and curvilinear gabled homesteads of the Dutch
farmers who had settled the Cape peninsula and beyond. This was probably fired by the
Queen Anne style then fashionable in Britain, although the appreciation for vernacular
and traditional architecture fostered by the Arts and Crafts movement also played its part.
His first example of this revival, the “restoration” of Grootte Schuur (1896; since 1994,
the state president’s guest house) for his patron, Rhodes, has been shown to be a
fantastical reinvention of a once-sedate Georgian barn conversion. His homes for the
wealthy “Randbarons” on Parktown Ridge of Johannesburg follow in the Arts and Crafts
tradition, as, for example, the house known as Northwards.

A colonial war (Anglo-Boer War, 1899-1902) heralded the new century. The British
had to maintain long lines of supply and communication, and so industrialization came
into its own. Kit wood-and-iron utility buildings, popular in the diamond rush to
Kimberley and the gold rush to the Witwatersrand in the latter half of the 19th century,
came back into their own for military use. The crowning achievement of prefabrication
was the supply of parts of buildings as fortification—loopholes, ladders, and hatches—in
steel. These were built into blockhouses, the rest constructed from any immediately
available material. Thousands were erected, and many survive.

At that time, the independent Boer (farmer-trekkers of Dutch descent) republics had
their own architectural patrimony, a European eclecticism rooted in the Beaux Arts. The


Department of Public Works was newly established in 1887 by President Paul Kruger
(1825-1904). The Dutch contingent of architect immigrants, with Sytze Wierda (1839-
1911) as head, brought with them current European practice. The best examples are the
Raadsaal (Legislature, 1892) and Palace of Justice (1900). This same styling manifested
in the then German colonies of German South West Africa and German East Africa, best
represented by the “Tintenpalast” (“Ink Palace,’ Administrative Building, 1913,
Windhoek, Namibia). In the northern countries of Europe, Schinkel’s influence was still
strong—the tradition of brick buildings for public commissions in particular. This was
reflected in the schools, magistrate’s courts, and other utility buildings of the period, as in
the Johannesburg Post Office (1897). The colonial tradition of the Germans persists in
Dar Es Salaam and, while contributing to the architectural character of the city, was one
of the motivating factors for moving the capital inland to Dodoma. The term
“Wilhelmine,” deriving from both Wilhelm II (1859-1942), German emperor and ninth
king of Prussia, and Wilhelmina (1880-1962), queen of the Netherlands, is used for the
stylistic influences of northern European architects in German colonial Africa. It is the
equivalent of Victorian style in that both show eclecticism and revivalist styling
(particularly neo-Romanesque and neo-Gothic) but differ in their sources and treatment
of style elements, particularly domes and decorative trimmings. The style found its most
ebullient expression in his turn-of-the-19th-century Ostrich Feather Palaces, designed by
Johannes Egbertus Vixseboxse (1863-1943), in Oudshoorn (South Africa).

In the Union of South Africa (1910), which formed from the colonies of Cape and
Natal and the defeated Boer republics of the Orange Free State (Orange River Colony,
1902-10) and the South African Republic (Transvaal Colony, 1902-10), Baker and his
office, as official architect to the Church of England (Anglican Church) and favored
architect of the Department of Public Works, received numerous commissions, with the
Union Buildings (1912) in Pretoria being his crowning achievement.

A vast array of state and private commissions by the young coterie of architects was
brought into the Department of Public Works by the British administration. They belong
to the socalled Baker School, a collective term coined by Pearce (first head of school of
the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg—himself a Baker boy) to cover the
works of the young architects who worked either in Baker’s office or in the employ in the
Department of Public Works in the colonies of the Free State and Transvaal (1902-10).
With its attention to craftsmanship in detail, traditional use of material to suit
circumstances, and free borrowing of styles, it dominated architectural thought for
decades after Baker’s departure. Included in the school are the works produced in his
own office and of his own imagination in the years 1902-13, when he was resident in
South Africa; commissions carried out by his successors in the firm in the period 1913—
20 at the dissolution of the partnership; work done by previous members of the
partnership after 1920 or former assistants who established independent practices on
leaving; and then contemporary architects inspired by his work but having little or no
direct association in practice. This styling of the Edwardian period in the other British
colonies, with a mix of Arts and Crafts revivalism and neoclassicism, particularly in its
state and civic expression, was meant to aggrandize the sense of empire and, hence, is
known as the Empire style. Lutyens’s (1869-1944) New Delhi Secretariat complex, to
which he had been jointly appointed with Baker, epitomized this style in India. Lutyens
too has his legacy in South Africa: the Johannesburg Civic Art Gallery (1915).


Opportunities for these architects expanded to the northern colonies of Southern and
Northern Rhodesia (since 1964, Zambia, and since 1980, Zimbabwe, respectively),
Bechuanaland (1885; since 1966, Botswana), and beyond to Nyasaland (1891; since
1964, Malawi) and the East African Protectorate (now Kenya).

A reaction to British imperialism was to be found in the person of Gerhard Moerdyk
(1890-1958). Born on African soil and educated at the Architectural Association in
London, he looked to northern European precedent, particularly the Ro-

Old Stone Town, Zanzibar, Pwani Region, Tanzania
Photo by Francesco Siravo © Historic Cities Support Programme/Aga
Khan Trust for Culture

mantic Nationalism (the term derives from Kidder Smith as applied to certain early 20th-
century trends in Sweden) of the Baltic peninsula. The brooding and somber Voortrekker
Monument (1949) remains his personal triumph, although he matched the number of
Baker’s Anglo-Saxon ecclesiastic architecture with more than 80 Afrikaans Protestant
churches, built from Windhoek, South West Africa (now Namibia), to Salisbury (now
Harare, Zimbabwe). His joint appointment to the Johannesburg Station (1932) with
Gordon Leith gave opportunity for demonstrating the use of local materials and
decorative motifs and artworks (their school colleague Henk Pierneef was commissioned
for these) on a public scale. These Romantic Nationalists show diverse stylistic
influences, but central to their endeavor is an expression of the use of local material and
decorative devices. There is usually an underlying classicism and thus sometimes the use
of classical elements, although often in modern guise.

Until the 1920s, architects of the southern African subcontinent were obliged to study
abroad. The first local architectural graduates were from the Witwatersrand School
(established in 1923) and made their mark internationally. The students brought the
Modern movement to the subcontinent with their publication (1933; the sans-serif
uncapitalized lettering a deliberate choice, showing solidarity with the Bauhaus). In their


seminal publication, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Le Corbusier were heralded as role
models. Le Corbusier was sent an issue and responded with an approving letter,
published in the (vol. 20, no. 11 [1936], 381-83) and used to preface his In this he
coined the term “the Transvaal Group,” a name that has stuck. South Africa was thus at
the cutting edge of the Modern movement in the post-Depression years. Monuments to
the period are the residential blocks built in the developing higher-density suburbs of
Johannesburg and Pretoria.

In the years directly following World War II, Expressionist modernism became
popular on the subcontinent, fired by the “Brazil Builds” exhibition (1943) and the
subsequent publication of the same name. Graduates from the architectural schools of the
Witwatersrand and Pretoria (established 1943) had a particular affinity for the style, and
the became a “Little Brazil,” a style term used by Chipkin (1993) and derived from
Pevsner’s (1953) observation that Johannesburg was “a little Brazil within the
Commonwealth.” The appellation has expanded to all southern African architecture of
the 1950s and 1960s that reflects Brazilian influence. The idiom is most flamboyant in
the then-Portuguese colonies of Angola and Mozambique, particularly in Lorenco
Marques (now Maputo), with Pancho Guedes (1925-) being its distinguished exponent.
Graduates from the Witwatersrand and Pretoria Schools (the latter established 1943) had
a particular affinity for the style, and the became a “Little Brazil,” typified by buildings
that were overtly styled against sun penetration—exaggerated louvers, and egg-crate
sun guards, with the first such building being Helmut Stauch’s Meat Board Building
(1952).

A movement with nationalist roots but without an overt political agenda was the
emergence of a regionalist school, and Norman Eaton (1902-66) was its recognized
founder and master. He frequently traveled to East Africa, sketching and photographing,
bringing these motifs to his buildings as sculptured elements and patterning in brickwork
and paving; his Bank of Netherlands buildings (Pretoria, 1953, and Durban, 1966) are his
finest testimonies. This style, termed Pretoria Regionalism, epitomized by Eaton, is a
variant of the Modern movement where the tenets of modernism are tempered by
considerations of local material, techniques, traditions, and climate. Graduates of the
Pretoria School moved away from the aesthetic of large expanses of window and clipped
eaves toward an architectural expression of deeply recessed or screened windows and
wide eaves, verandas, and pergolas. Materials of choice were stock bricks, gum poles,
stone, and roughcast exposed concrete. Traditional elements such as downpipes and
shutters were employed, although they were reinterpreted in modern idiom.

World War II brought with it the demise of the European colonial empires.
Postcolonial Africa needed new symbols of independence. Nairobi, Kenya, as the capital
of one of the first independent southern African British colonies, engaged in a program of
high-rise building. High-rises were not new to the subcontinent. Johannesburg (South
Africa) had always been at the forefront of the tallest modern structures on the continent,
the most innovative being the Standard Bank tower, the most ambitious the Carlton
Complex. Today, it is the Reserve Bank (1990, Pretoria), in neo-Miesian style, that holds
the honor.

In the 1970s, New Brutalism, a term associated with Peter and Allison Smithson of
England, found its way across the continent through the offices of the Transvaal Institute
of Architects and the Witwatersrand School, who invited the Smithsons to visit South


Africa. Similar influences were through the frequent visits of Fry and Drew and Paul
Rudolph from the United States. The aesthetic was an uncompromising ruthlessness,
intellectual clarity, and honest presentation of structure and materials. The University of
South Africa (Pretoria) best epitomizes this period and is possibly the largest single
commission in the world that can be ascribed to only one architect—namely, Brian
Sandrock.

Louis Kahn was also highly influential and established a committed following among
local students who had gone to Philadelphia to do postgraduate studies under him. Roelof
Uytenbogaardt (1933-98) is possibly the most esteemed local protégé, and his Steinkopf
Community Centre (1985) is probably the best architectural example, although his
contribution as teacher of urban design at the University of Cape Town remains his
enduring legacy. Unfortunately, his honest opposition to the apartheid state denied him
any commissions of substance.

In the late 1960s there arose an international interest in traditional African
construction and styling provoked by the Museum of Modern Art exhibition
“Architecture without Architects” (1964). A concern for alternative low-tech architecture
gained further impetus with the oil crisis of the 1970s. Hasan Fathy (1900-89) was
teaching mud construction up north, where both tradition and vernacular were explored
as precedent; his critical sensitivity catalyzed a reevaluation of the architectural heritage
of the subcontinent. There is now a concern for conserving traditionally African cities,
monuments, and settlements (such as Zanzibar, Mozambique Island, and Great
Zimbabwe). Restoration in the 1990s of Stone City, an Arabic heritage of Zanzibar, with
assistance by the Aga Khan Foundation, is a case in point. A rise and growth of Islam has
witnessed a revival in the tradition of mosque buildings, with Mohammed Mayet being a
practitioner particularly skilled in interpreting the type. The largest such building to date
is the Kerk Street Mosque (started 1994, under construction) in Johannesburg.

Attempts to translate an understanding of the architecture of Africa into a body of
theory have been termed “Afrocentricity” (Hughes, 1994), an understanding directed at
African-American practitioners that has searched find a theory of Afrocentric architecture
through a process of using observed empirical data based on three principal areas of the
built environment: historic prece-dent (including ancient civilizations and monuments),
cultural elements (including customs, ceremonies, and living patterns as well as
representational aspects of artifacts), and elements of the environment (including climate)
and ecology (including geologic conditions and physical features).

African sensibilities in architecture find their best expression in buildings as
ensembles rather than as individual set pieces. Liberated states needed new capitals, and
it is here that the expression of African spaces is made. Dodoma, as the newly conceived
capital for Tanzania, is a people’s forum, a space for the meeting of governance and
populace. Lilongwe, the designated new capital of Malawi that was meant to replace
Blantyre, has ambitious intentions of pedestrianized boulevards and vehicular routes but
languishes as it derives from the personal ambitions for aggrandizement of the president.
An interesting new capital is Mafikeng, provincial capital of North West Province, South
Africa, conceived as the “capital,” Mmbatho, of “the independent homeland” of
Boputhutswana. This had been done as part of the apartheid ideology of Bantustans (the
suffix “-stan” being a cynical attempt at exploiting Balkanization through association
with the separation of India and Pakistan at independence, which had the support of the

international community). It was meant to supplant nearby afiking, which had served as
the out-of-country administrative center for the Bechaunaland protectorate until the
protectorate became the independent state of Botswana and relocated its capital to
Gaborone. In the Legislative Administration Building (1982), Britz and Scholes explore
the traditional or place of gathering, built in monumental brickwork and expressed in
Kahnian style and scale. Yet there is a pervasive sense of an African place in the spaces.

At present, some.practitioners on the African continent meet the ongoing challenge of
designing affordable, appropriate, and sustainable architecture. The Eastgate Building
(1996, Pearce Partnership) in Harare serves as an example, as does the Appropriate
Technology Centre (1999, Stauch Vorster, MOM) in Gabarone, Botswana. There are,
outside the mainstream of commercialism, architects who engage with communities as
clients and attempt to express their clients’ concerns and financial circumstances in built
form; for example, Liebenberg Masojada (Kwadengezi Cemetery reception area, 1995,
Kwa-Zulu Natal, South Africa), Design Workshop (Warwick Avenue Bridge Market,
1999, Durban, South Africa), and CS Studio (Uthago Lotyebiselwano [Learning Centre],
Nyanga East, South Africa).

Under the auspices of the Commonwealth Association of Architects, those schools of
architecture established in the emergent independent African states once under British
rule partake in academic exchange and scrutiny of their teaching programs by
accreditation boards. More and more architectural graduates are emerging from these
institutions, and as time passes, their contribution should become more apparent.

ROGER C.FISHER
Aga Khan Award; Baker, Herbert (England and South Africa); Lutyens, Edwin
(England)

Further Reading

There is not much by way of contemporary writing on the architecture of the southern
subcontinent of Africa. Various tourist guides give access to some of the buildings as part
of the tourist itinerary but often lack pertinent architectural information. Recent
publications relating directly to architecture are listed below.

Beck, Haig (editor), London: International Architect, 1985

Chipkin, Clive, Cape Town: David Philip, 1993

Elleh, Nnamdi, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997

Fisher, Roger, Schalk le Roux, and Estelle Mareé (editors), Pretoria: UNISA, 1998

Judin, Hilton, and Ivan Vladislavic (editors), Rotterdam: Netherlands Institute of Architects,
1998

Muwanga, Christina, London: Elipsis, 1998

Prinsloo, Ivor (editor), Cape Town: Picasso Headline

AGA KHAN AWARD 1977-

The Aga Khan Award for Architecture was established in 1977 by His Highness the Aga
Khan, the 49th hereditary Imam of the Shia Ismaili Muslims, to enhance the
understanding of Islamic culture and its architecture. The program, administered by the
Aga Khan Trust for Culture, recognizes and awards architectural excellence, with special
concern for contemporary design, social housing, community development, restoration,
conservation, and environmentalism. One of the principles of the Aga Khan Foundation
has been to encourage sustainability whereby recipients of the Aga Khan’s largesse
would themselves be able to reinvest in the future of their own communities. The Aga
Khan’s influence is widespread and includes the establishment in the United States of the
Aga Khan Program for Islamic Architecture (1979), jointly run by the Massachusetts
Institute for Technology and Harvard University, and the creation of the Aga Khan
Award for Architecture.

In 1976 the Aga Khan announced that he would establish an architectural award as a
means of fostering the growth of a modern and vibrant Islamic architecture within the
context of rich and valuable traditions. In spanning political and geographical boundaries,
a major objective of the award was to create an overarching sense of unity for the Muslim
world, in spite of distinctive and sometimes disparate cultures. “Excellence in
architecture” was attributed not only to examples of finely designed architecture, but also
to community projects, such as housing for the poor and civil engineering works, clearly
demonstrating the future direction of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture.

In 1988, the Aga Khan reorganized his network of philanthropic institutions. The Aga
Khan Award for Architecture was transferred from the Aga Khan Foundation to the
newly established Aga Khan Trust for Culture, also responsible for the Historic Cities
Support Programme and the Education and Culture Programme. The goals of these
cultural agencies were aligned with the Aga Khan’s original list of challenges for the
Islamic world—pursuit of excellence in architecture and related disci-plines, conservation
and re-use of historic buildings and spaces, and education for architects and urban
planners. A fourth objective of the Trust for Culture was to encourage the interchange of
ideas to enhance awareness of the relationship between historic and contemporary
Muslim cultures and their built environments.

On occasion, the Aga Khan has bestowed a special Chairman’s Award to recognize
outstanding achievement in Muslim architecture. In 1980 the first was presented to
Egypt’s Hassan Fathy, architect, artist, and poet, particularly acknowledging his
encouragement of vernacular building systems and his work improving the built
environment of impoverished peoples. Others have followed and include Rifat Chadirji of
Iraq and Geoffrey Bawa of Sri Lanka.

Recipients of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture have now totalled 80, and they
have been as diverse as the cultures they represent. One of the most prevalent themes
throughout the history of the award has been the social responsibility of architecture. This
was reflected in the 1980 award to the Kampung Improvement Programme in Jakarta, the

Grameen Bank Housing Programme in Bangladesh (1989 award), and the multiphased
Hafsia Quarter project in Tunis (1983 and 1995 awards). Such humanitarian
considerations were also evident in awards given for educational and medical facilities,
such as the Medical Centre in Mopti, Mali (1980 award) and the Lepers Hospital,
Maharashtra Province, India (1998 award). Another major award theme was heritage
preservation, as evidenced by the awards for restoration of Jerusalem’s Al-Aqsa Mosque
(1986 award), conservation of Old Sana’a in Yemen (1995 award), and restoration of
Bukhara Old City, Uzbekistan (1995 award). Juries concerned with self-sustainability
often appreciated projects demonstrating the viability of vernacular construction
techniques and traditional building forms or the use of locally available materials. This
priority is evident in the Yaama Mosque in Tahoua, Niger (1986 award) and the Stone
Building System employed in Dar’a Province, Syria (1992 award).

Despite the fact that the Aga Khan Awards for Architecture have so far been
principally bestowed on projects in North Africa, the Middle East, and Asia (the only
central European recipient was the Institut du Monde Arabe in Paris), the international
architectural community has steadily developed an interest in the awards. Because
cultural, religious, and economic conditions in most Muslim countries differ so much
from Western societies, a lack of sympathy for the priorities of the award program
persists, although the expanding cadre of skilled Islamic architects and planners is
helping to alleviate this.

This awards program has significantly inspired the architectural representation of
Islamic culture during the past 25 years. At a time when many of these cultures were
threatened by Western influence, by economic failure, and by political violence, the Aga
Khan’s initiative reminded everyone of the quality of this cultural heritage. At the same
time, the award’s broad scope, with its emphasis on alleviating living conditions of the
poor, on sustainability, and on the environment, has encouraged innovative solutions to
rapidly worsening societal problems. Although this award does not fit the mold of
Western architectural perceptions, its initial priorities were clearly established and are
constantly evolving to meet the needs of many cultural communities. Emphasizing not
only contemporary architecture, but also historic architectural traditions threatened by
reconstruction and development, the Aga Khan Award for Architecture has helped to
create a means of expressing Islamic ideals in a modern context. The award promotes a
sense of pride in Muslim culture, and the vast number of submissions has facilitated
documentation of over 6,000 works of modern Islamic architecture, providing inspiration
for future generations.

RHODA BELLAMY
Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise, Kaolack, Senegal; Bawa, Geoffrey (Sri Lanka);
Chadirji, Rifat (Iraq); Entrepreneurship Development Institute, Ahmedabad, India; Fathy,
Hassan (Egypt); Great Mosque of Niono, Mali; Gitirel Family Summer Residence,
Canakkale, Turkey; Haj Terminal, Jeddah Airport; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Riyadh,
Mosque; Mosque of the Grand National Assembly, Ankara, Turkey; National Assembly
Building, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka; Social Security Complex, Istanbul;
Sustainability/Sustainable Architecture; Vidhan Bhavan (State Assembly), Bhopal;
Yaama Mosque, Tahoua, Niger

Further Reading

A monograph has been published for each cycle of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture

that reviews the successful entries, describing the jury and the selection process. These

volumes also include essays discussing contemporary issues pertaining to Islamic

architecture.

Daftary, Farhad, Princeton, New Jersey: Markus Wiener Publishers, 1998 and 2001

Davidson, Cynthia C. (editor), London: Thames and Hudson Ltd. and The Aga Khan
Award for Architecture, 1998

Davidson, Cynthia C., and Ismail Serageldin (editors), London: The Aga Khan Award for
Architecture and Academy Editions, 1995

Ivy, Robert, “An Interview with the Aga Khan,” (February 2002)

Michell, George (editor), London: Thames and Hudson Ltd., 1995

Ozhan, Suha, “Legacies of the Future” in edited by Cynthia Davidson, London: Thames
and Hudson Ltd. and The Aga Khan Award for Architecture, 1998

Robson, David (editor) with Kenneth Frampton and Charles Correa, London: Thames and
Hudson Ltd. and The Aga Khan Award for Architecture, 2001

Steele, James (editor), London: The Aga Khan Award for Architecture and Academy Editions,
1992

AGREST, DIANA, AND MARIO
GANDELSONAS

Architects, United States

Agrest and Gandelsonas, Architects, is an imternationally recognized firm that was
established by its principals, Diana Agrest and Mario Gandelsonas, in New York in 1980.
With a focus on architecture, urban design, and interior design in relation to the city, the
firm has been an integral part of New York’s architecture community. Celebrated for
their work in developing an understanding and practice of architecture through lin-
guistics and semiotics, Agrest and Gandelsonas have been instrumental in advancing the
course of contemporary architecture in the wake of late modernism. Establishing a self-
named critical practice in which writing, drawing, and building would have equal weight,
they have played a key role in the architecture community’s reevaluation of design as part
of a larger cultural context.

Natives of Buenos Aires, both Agrest and Gandelsonas were educated at the
University of Buenos Aires School of Architecture and studied linguistics with the
French semiotician and philosopher Roland Barthes in Paris. Arriving in New York in the
late 1970s, they became Fellows of the Institute of Architecture and Urban Studies,
where they played key roles in establishing the institute as both educational venue and
publisher of periodicals such as and Agrest is adjunct professor of architecture at The
Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and AA in New York and has taught at
Princeton, Yale, and Columbia universities in addition to lecturing throughout the world.
Gandelsonas is the 1913 Professor of Architecture at Princeton and has taught at Yale,


Harvard, the University of Illinois, and the University of Southern California. He has also
lectured widely throughout the world. Authors and coauthors of a number of books on
architecture, urbanism, and architectural theory, Agrest and Gandelsonas are also
responsible for a series of seminal essays and articles that have fixed their place in the
history of architecture. Agrest is the author of (1991), a collection of essays on
the relationship between architecture and larger cultural phenomena, as well as editor of
another collection of essays, (1996), whereas Gandelsonas has published two books
documenting his unique approach to the formal analysis of the American city: (1991)
and (1999). Jointly, Agrest and Gandelsonas produced their own monongraph,
(1995).

Moving away from the rational, purist, and autonomous architecture that characterized
so much of modernism, Agrest and Gandelsonas have looked outside and around the
actual discipline of architecture to inform their approach to working within the field.
Drawing on such diverse sources as history, semiotics, language, psychology, and film,
they have taken their architecture beyond exercises in formal manipulation to reflect
culture and society at large. Their point of reference has been that of a broad sociocultural
spectrum rather than strict formalism. Agrest’s insightful essay, “Design versus Non-
Design,” originally published in (1979), is a poignant refutation of

Melrose Community Center, view from south garden, Bronx, New
York, designed by Agrest and Gandelsonas Architects (2000)
© David Sunberg/Esto

an unthinking formulaic attitude toward design and a call to acknowledge the merits of
that which is less self-consciously designed. Gandelsonas’s often-quoted “On Reading
Architecture” (1972) asked the design world to pause and recognize the textual capacity
of architectural design as a language in and of itself.

An intensely felt and highly unique perception of the city has formed the basis of this
firm’s work, whether it has been for competitions, buildings, or interiors. Reading the
city as a text, the architects have continuously analyzed, both verbally and visually, the
forms, programs, signs, and symbols of the urban condition. Taking the American city as
their primary subject, they have identified on a number of levels the systems and
hierarchy of the structure of the city while deriving meaning from their forms and
compositions. Continuously reassessing the relationships between fabric and monument,
street and plan, and nature and artifice, the duo keeps the analysis fresh and ready for
further interrogation. Gandelsonas’s striking analytic diagrams of the American city,
which have become a trademark of his investigation into urban morphology, have
brought plan, street, building fabric, monument, and nature into a concert of form that is
at once artistically appealing and scientifically legible.

A clearly defined idea or concept is central to every project that the firm of Agrest and
Gandelsonas develops. Intertwining theory with practice, they treat research, analysis,
and writing as part of their practice and practice as part of their theory. They perceive
architecture as possessing three distinct phases—writing (text), drawing (graphic), and
place (building)—and embrace each for what it brings to furthering the role of
architecture within the culture at large.

While giving careful consideration to historic and contextual parameters, they explore
material and technical possibilities for giving shape and meaning to the projects they
lesign, whether it is for a building, an interior, or an object.

A trio of apartment buildings in Buenos Aires (1977) that explored issues of scale,
typology, and material while responding to historical and contextual conditions within
both classical and modern idioms established the identity of Agrest and Gandelsonas in
he built environment. A series of much published and exhibited proposals for reshaping
he American city have acted as a barometer of their intellectual investigations at the
evel of urban design and have ultimately led to practical applications. Their Vision Plan
for Des Moines, Iowa (1992), rejects the notion of the master plan and instead embraces
he fluid permutations and idiosyncrasies that sociopolitical and economic factors can
end to urban design. Their South Bronx Community Center (2000) presents a footprint
that is contextual and object like at once. Although a linear blocklike element refers both
to the tower-in-the-park type of housing project in which it is set as well as a generic
block of fabric, its prominent oval form acts as both marker in the city and reference to
the idea of object endemic to the midcentury modernism of the housing project it is built
within. Designs for houses, both built and unbuilt, have provided exercises for the
architects in the manipulation of typology, scale, and compositional sequence. The Villa
Amore (1990) in Southampton, New York, reinterprets the Shinglestyle house as a
grouping of “found objects” in a modern idiom. The urban interiors of this pair of
designers have been directly responsive to the city while acting as testing grounds for the
design of objects that blur the distinction between furniture and architecture. The design
of an apartment on Central Park West (1988) was a veritable laboratory for the testing of
material and form as catalyst between furniture and architecture.

Architects, writers, and educators with an indomitable spirit for exploration and the
shedding of light on the multiple perceptions of architecture, Agrest and Gandelsonas
have had a profound influence on generations of students, critics, architects, and the
general public. They continue to read and research the city as both foundation and testing

fa

t
t


ground for their work while slowly but surely enhancing the urban landscape with the
fruit of that investigation.
CHRISTIAN ZAPATKA.

Selected Works

Building 1, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 1977

Building 2, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 1977

Building 3, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 1977

Upper East Side Townhouse, Manhattan, 1985

Framings, Bill Robinson Showroom, New York, 1985

Interior on Park Avenue, New York, New York, 1986

Interior on Central Park West, New York, New York, 1987-88

House on Sag Pond, Southampton, New York, 1989-90

Vision Plan, Des Moines, Iowa, 1990-92

Des Moines International Airport, Des Moines, Iowa, 1992

A Town Plan for 10,000, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China, 1996
Vision Plan, Red Bank, New Jersey, 1992-97

Pool House, Sagaponack, New York, 1998-99

Las Casas, Jose Ignacio, Uruguay, 1997-02

Melrose Community Center, South Bronx, New York, 2001
Breukelen Community Center, Brooklyn, New York, 2002-05 (expected completion
date)

Selected Publications

By Diana Agrest and Mario Gandelsonas:
“Critical Remarks on Semiology and Architecture,” 9, no. 3 (1973)
“Semiology and Architecture: Ideological Consumption or Theoretical Work?” 1 (1973)
“Semiotics and the Limits of Architecture,” in edited by Thomas A.Sebeok, 1977
“Architecture as Cultural Practice,” 114 (March 1980)
“On Practice,” 114 (March 1980) 1995

By Diana Agrest:
“The Sky’s the Limit,’ 60 (December 1975)
“Architectural Anagrams: The Symbolic Performance of Skyscrapers,” 11 (Winter 1977)
“Towards a Theory of Production of Sense in the Built Environment (1968-72),” in edited by

Stanford Anderson, 1978
“The Architecture of the City” (interview with Aldo Rossi), (September 1979)
“Design versus Non-Design,” 27 (1979)
“The City as the Place of Representation,” —113—114 (City Segments) (January 1980)
“Notes on Film and Architecture,” (September 1981)

edited and principal essay by Agrest, 1982
“Architecture of Mirror/Mirror of Architecture,” 26 (1984)
“Architecture from Without: Body, Logic and Sex,” 7 (1987)
1991
edited by Agrest with Patricia Conway and Leslie Kanes Weisman, 1996


By Mario Gandelsonas:

“On Reading Architecture,” (March 1972)

“Linguistics, Poetics and Architectural Theory,” 1, no. 2 (Fall 1974)

“Semiotics and Architecture,” 64 (April 1976)

“Theoretical Landscapes,” 11 (1976)

“On Reading Eisenstein, Reading Piranesi,” 11 (1978)

“From Structure to Subject,” 17 (1979)

“From Structure to Subject: The Foundation of an Architectural Language,” in edited by Peter
Eisenman, 1982

AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS

The critic Robert Venturi has referred to gas stations and other vernacular structures
located along commercial strips as “decorated sheds.” His use of the name of a utilitarian,
work-oriented structure suggests that sheds, barns, and other such structures are most
importantly utilitarian; nevertheless, they also possess meaning that is based on a
definable structural program. Buildings used in American agriculture possess clear
structural forms, but their emphasis as work buildings also allows them to function as a
material artifact of changes in the social and economic context of labor on the American
farm.

The agricultural landscape is a composite of many structures designed around the
natural cycles of planting, harvest, and maintenance that define farm labor. Such
component structures might include those designed for a specific animal (such as chicken
houses), specific storage (milk houses or springhouses), limited processes (smokehouses,
summer kitchens, sugarhouses, evaporators), grain and fodder storage (granaries,
corncribs, silos), and even fencing. Most important, however, such structures are
sublimated in the overall layout to the central barn. The American plantation serves as an
example that did not use the central barn and instead relied on sprawling compounds of
smaller buildings around one central home (the big house); most American agriculture,
however, operates on a central plan defined by the barn.

The American barn is one of the nation’s most ubiquitous architectural signifiers. In
addition to its obvious utilitarian function, to many observers the barn is a symbol of the
rugged individualism that Thomas Jefferson and others connected to the American
yeoman farmer. The barn and the farm that it supports became one of the most flexible
mechanisms for American expansion. A closer analysis of specific barn styles and types
reveals overall diversity while suggesting continuity between region, ethnic groups, and
general agricultural function.

Prior to 1900, barns were primarily wood, although sometimes constructed from brick
or stone. Most barns function as a mixed-use facility, prioritizing storage, shelter, and
ventilation. Many barn styles integrated stables and other areas to shelter animals. Often,
silos or areas in which to store feed were then also integrated into the site. Crib barns, for
instance, contained storage facilities within the structure; more often, tall, cylindrical

silos would be incorporated into the overall plan in order to free up the interior space for
storing machinery. Thus the program of the American barn prioritizes functionality.
Barns, like many of the site’s supporting structures, followed the most general design
patterns. Plank framing supported expansive walls, which were then normally covered in
planking. Traditional Anglo-American joining (based on carving joints to make them
interlock), of course, served as the ancestor of the better-known balloon frame, which
replaced such joints with nails. Standardized parts, simplified joints, and two-story studs
and bearers link the balloon-frame form to traditional carpentry. In such a design,
studding was placed at a minimum. As tools and mechanization changed by 1900,
balloon framing became a standard form, and even as materials changed in the 20th
century, the balloon frame remained the norm. Although many farmers or agricultural
corporations have opted for manufactured buildings sided in fiberglass or aluminum
panels, the structural support remains extremely similar to the original balloon frame.
Flooring, however, has added structural support by incorporating a solid cement founding
where formerly dirt or planks served the facility.

Prefabrication, as an architectural pattern, grew out of increased technology. By the
turn of the century, the timber-rich Pacific Northwest, upper Midwest, and Southeast
were the headquarters of corporations that sold prefabricated, mail-order farm buildings
and commercial structures. During World War IL the Seabees, a portion of the U.S.
Navy, created prefabricated, all-purpose buildings that could be manufactured in the
United States and shipped anywhere. The Quonset hut was made from preformed wooden
ribs sheathed with corrugated sheet steel and fitted with pressed-wood interior linings.
After use in the war, more than 170,000 of these structures would return to the United
States for use in agriculture and industry. Prefabrication had even more application in the
utilitarian world of agricultural structures than in the suburban countryside, where it
would be applied by William Levitt (1947) and others.

As agriculture expanded westward, infrastructural links became major components in
connecting the agricultural hinterland to railroad corridors. Following the completion of
the transcontinental railroad in 1869, the entire American West would be linked by
technology as “hinterland” to Chicago and other developing shipping centers. The
program of the rural, agrarian landscape remains dominated by this economic
relationship. Most prolific, grain elevators serve as tremendous storage facilities at
railroad termini. Industrial architecture of the early 1900s was widely influenced by
European modernism and particularly Walter Gropius, including these massive
compounds for grain storage and transshipment of steel or concrete tubes (from one to
hundreds). Located in towns and shipping ports, these facilities became fully automated
with electricity in the 20th century.

Technology has allowed the contemporary agricultural landscape to sprawl over land
often hostile to farming. Hydraulic management allows vast tracts of the American West,
particularly the Great Plains and California’s Central Valley, to produce enough goods to
feed the entire world. Located west of the isohyetal line of 20 inches, such locations lack
the necessary rainfall for agriculture. Building on hydraulic concepts developed by
natives of the Southwest and of Utah Mormons, federal subsidies initiated by the 1902
Reclamation Act have helped to finance infrastructure that spreads the limited water
resources of the West among the arid regions. Additionally, many farmers in the Great
Plains have drilled into aquifers, including the Ogallala, and then planted circular fields


irrigated by center-pivot watering systems. The extension of agriculture into such regions
is a technological wonder of American society; however, it also makes farmers
precariously dependent on the management of a limited resource.

Patterns in agricultural buildings have not all solely followed a program of utility. As
large agricultural corporations have taken over lands of the midwestern and western
United States, preservationists throughout the nation have sought to preserve the image of
the independent yeoman farmer. Most often, this effort has seen organizations such as the
National Farmland Trust raising funds to preserve older farmsteads that are threatened by
suburban or urban expansion. Another social change to the farm structure relates to
Venturi’s idea of the decorated shed. For many years, the largest shed, the barn, was
viewed as a billboardin-the-making. Tobacco companies often painted an entire side of
the barn with advertisements for Mail Pouch or Red Man. As part of the antismoking
furor of the late 1990s, these billboards were banned and removed. The barn has
consistently belied its status as purely a utilitarian structure to inspire and exhibit social
ideas and ideals.

BRIAN BLACK
Further Reading
Banham, Reyner, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
Cronon, William, New York: Norton, 1991
Jackson, Donald C., Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1995
McMurry, Sally, New York: Oxford University Press, 1988
Noble, Allen G., and Richard K.Cleek, New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University
Press, 1995
Worster, Donald, New York: Pantheon, 1985; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992

AHMEDABAD, INDIA

Described by 16th-century European travelers as “the handsomest town in Hindustan,
perhaps in the world,” in the 17th century as a “city comparable in size and wealth to
London” and as “the Manchester of the East” for its thriving textile industry, Ahmedabad
eventually hosted an architectural treasure trove in the 20th century. This metropolis in
western India, with a population of more than 2.8 million, is home to four key buildings
designed by Le Corbusier (1887-1965), the well-crafted Indian Institute of Management
Campus (1962-73) by American architect Louis I.Kahn (1901-74), and outstanding
projects by leading Indian architects Charles Correa (1930), Balkrishna Doshi (1927),
and Achyut Kanvinde (1916).

Named after its founder, Anmed Shah, Ahmedabad was established in 1411 on the site
of Ashawal, an earlier trading settlement that was abandoned in the 11 th century.
Occupying the east bank of the Sabarmai River, the original city of Ahmedabad,
popularly known as the Old City, continues to serve as a distinct commercial and


residential core of the present-day metropolis. With the building of the Ellis Bridge in
1870 (a wooden structure replaced by steel in 1882) and subsequent construction of a
series of reinforced-concrete bridges capable of withstanding monsoon floods, the city
started to expand across to the west bank. New bridges opened the less crowded west, or
right, bank of the river. The empty west bank was more attractive for development
compared with the crowded east side. This remains so today, even as the city is now
spread equally on both sides of the river. The expansion of the west bank in the 20th
century encouraged a wide range of new architecture. It would be a mistake, however, to
overlook the Old City, because the living architectural heritage from the last five
centuries can be found alongside 20th-century buildings. Noteworthy modern projects in
the Old City include the Premabhai Hall (1972) and the Central Bank of India Head
Office (1966) by Doshi, the Reserve Bank Headquarters (1969) by Hasmukh Patel
(1933), the Roman Catholic Church of Gaekwad-ni-Haveli (1979) by Leo Pereira (1943),
and the Geodesic Domed Calico Shop (1962) by Gautam (1917-95) and Gira Sarabhai
(1923).

Foundations of 20th-century architecture of Ahmedabad are primarily Western in
origin, beginning in the early 19th century, when the British took control of the city from
the Maratha kings. They established a military cantonment to the northeast of the Old
City in 1830. The railway was introduced in the 1860s with the first textile mill. In the
1870s, new gates were opened in the city wall, and large portions of it were pulled down
after World War I. Early expansion of modern Ahmedabad occurred on the side of the
Old City and in the direction of the cantonment. Suburban Shahibagh still holds a number
of well-designed homes of the rich mercantile class, including the Retreat (1936)
designed by Surendranath Kar (1892-1970), and Le Corbusier’s ground-hugging, vaulted
structure of the Sarabhai House (1951).

The completion of the Ellis Bridge was followed by increased development on the
west side of the river. Not too far from the bridgehead emerged the educational complex
of Gujarat College (c.1890), an eclectic Public Works Department project with Gothic,
Tudor, and local touches, where the George V Hall (1910) was renamed Mahatma
Gandhi Hall after India’s independence. Other important buildings include the Town Hall
(1940), designed by an influential British architect, Claude Batley (1879-1956); the
Bombay-based partnership of Gregson, Batley, and King is inspired by Indian traditions
and Western classical orders. The Town Hall, the Relief Cinema (1940), and the
Electricity House ( 1940) do not bear the typical stylistic imprint of these architects;
rather, the Art Deco and the International Style architecture seem to have inspired all
three buildings.

The Postindependence Era

Ashram Road, the main traffic artery connecting all bridgeheads along the west bank of
the Sabarmati River, begins near the Subhas Bridge to the north and ends near Sardar
Bridge to the south. A host of important civic structures are located along this road,
including Charles Correa’s Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya (1963), located less than 100
yards from the Hriday Kunj (heart grove) in the Sabarmati Ashram, where Gandhi
resided from 1917 to 1930. Built around 20-foot-square modules only 7 feet high with

hutlike structures that are interconnected and with courtyards, this modest and inspiring
edifice holds letters, photographs, and other documents of Gandhi. Kanvinde’s Darpana
Dance Academy (1968) fits beautifully with nature and its surroundings. To the south of
the Gandhi Bridge lies the wellknown Mill Owners’s Association Building by Le
Corbusier. The southernmost crossing of the river at Sardar Bridge is the cultural
prescient of Ahmedabad; Le Corbusier’s recently refurbished museum, or the Sanakar
Kendra (1954-57), the reinforced-concrete folded plate structure of Tagore Memorial
Theater (1962) by Doshi, and the rambling National Institute of Design Campus (1961)
by Gautam and Gira Sarabahi are all located here.

The westward growth of suburban Ahmedabad continued rapidly in the
postindependence period. A number of welldesigned private residences can be found in
these neighborhoods, including the Shodhan Villa (1951-54) by Le Corbusier, which,
according to his “recalls the ingenuity of the Villa Savoye...in a tropical Indian
setting.”

A number of educational and research institutions beyond these suburbs represent
significant contemporary architecture of Ahmedabad, including the Gujarat University
main buildings (1947) by Atmaram Gajjar (1901-61); a fine range of projects by
architect Doshi, including the Institute of Indology (1957-62), science buildings (1959-
62) for Gujarat University, the School of Architecture (1966-68), the Gandhi Labor
Institute (1980-84), and the Hussain-Doshi Gufa (1992-94), a mosaiccovered cavelike
exhibition structure; the Ahmedabad Textile Industries Research Association Facility
(1950-52) and the Physical Research Laboratory (1954) by Kanvinde; and the Newman
Hall (1970) and the Indian Space Research Organization (1975), two beautiful brick
complexes, by Hasmukh Patel. The Nehru Center for Environmental Education (1988—
90) by Neelkanth Chhaya (1951) and the Entrepreneur Development Institute (1985-87)
by Bimal Patel (1960) represent projects by young Indian architects. Louis Kahn’s
brooding brick complex of the Indian Institute of Management has served as an
inspiration to many of these projects.

Although the recent urban growth of Ahmedabad has not been very coherent and is
continuing in a rather uncontrolled fashion, a few housing projects provide attractive and
affordable places to live. For example, the Ahmedabad Study Action Group’s Housing
Rehabilitation Project (1973-75) provides housing for about 2,500 flood-affected
families in the southern suburb of Vasna. It combines a series of housing clusters around
a sequence of open spaces, well suited for community activities. In his Life Insurance
Corporation Project (1973-76), Doshi employed a stackable urban row house model that
allows users to expand their units. Architect Kamal Mangaldas’s (1938) narrow-front row
house project for Sanjay Park (1985) and the duplex-type Gulmohur Luxury Housing
(1986) support a sense of community and self-sufficiency by organizing rows of housing
around a cluster of amenities. However, such projects are few and far between.
Nevertheless, these enlightened housing and architectural projects distinguish
Ahmedabad from other rapidly expanding Indian cities.

VIKRAM BHATT

Art Deco; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, CharlesEdouard) (France); Correa, Charles Mark

(India); Doshi, Balkrishna (India); Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad;
International Style; Kahn, Louis (United States); Villa Savoye, Poissy, France

Further Reading

Ashraf, Kazi Khaleed, and James Belluardo (editors), New York: Architectural
League of New York, 1998
Bhatia, Gautam, “Indian Archetypes,” 197, no. 1179 (May 1995)
Bhatt, Vikram, and Peter Scriver, | Ahmedabad: Mapin, 1990
Caine, William Sproston, London and New York: Routledge, 1890; reprint, Delhi: Neeraj,
1982
Singapore: Concept Media, 1984; revised edition, by Hasan-Uddin Khan, Singapore: Concept
Media, and New York: Aperture, 1987
Chhaya, Neelkanth, “Centre for Environmental Education, Ahmedabad,” —_7, no. 3 (May-June
1990)
Corbusier, Le New York: G. Wittenborn, 1957
Cruickshank, Dan, “I Like a Brick,” 195, no. 9 (March 1992)
Curtis, William J.R., New York: Rizzoli, and Oxford: Phaidon, 1986

Curtis, William J.R., Ahmedabad: Mapin, and New York: Rizzoli, 1988
Desai, Madhavi, and Miki Desai, “Ahmedabad: The City as Palimpsest,” 8, no. 3 (1991)
Gillion, Kenneth L., Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968

19 vols., Anmedabad: Directorate of Government Printing, Stationery, and Publications, Gujarat
State, 1961-84; see especially vol. 18, 1984

London: John Murray, 1892; 21st edition, as edited by L.F.Rushbrook Williams,
1968
South Yarra, Victoria: Lonely Planet, 1981; 6th edition, as by Hugh Finlay et al.,
Hawthorn, Victoria, and London: Lonely Planet, 1996

Lang, Jon T., Madhavi Desai, and Miki Desai, Delhi, Oxford, and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997

Mehta, Meera, and Dinesh Mehta, New Delhi, London, and Newburry Park, California:
Sage, 1989

Mellin, Robert, “Sites and Services: Case Study, Ahmedabad,” no. 1 (1984)

Michell, George, and Philip Davies, 2 vols., London and New York: Viking, 1989

Michell, George, and Snehal Shah (editors), Bombay: Marg, 1988
Pandya, Yatin, “Balkrishna V.Doshi: Hussain-Doshi Gufa, Ahmedabad, India,” 40 (July 1994)

Steele, James, New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1998; as London:
Thames and Hudson, 1998
Wadhva, Kiran, New Delhi: Human Settlement Management Institute, and Rotterdam:

Institute for Housing Studies, 1989
Wisloscki, Peter, “Ahmedabad Authority: The Gijerat High Court Complex,” 58 (July-August
1997)

AIRPORT AND AVIATION BUILDING

Airports were a novel development without precedent. Although similar to railway
stations, aircraft had quite different architectural requirements to passenger trains. This
did not deter designers in the early 20th century from using the styling of train stations
and train interiors in their designs for the new airport terminals and aircraft cabin
interiors. Much as the great railway stations encapsulated the engineering achievements

of the 19th century, airport terminals were to become highly visible indicators of
technological advancement for nations and global cities in the 20th century.

The symbolism of airport terminals was present almost from the outset, but it has
undergone significant alteration over time, from the oversized modern designs of the
1930s; to expressive structures such as Eero Saarinen’s eaglelike TWA Terminal,
Idlewild, New York (1962); to the futurist high-tech terminals of the 1980s and 1990s. In
the mid-1960s, Paul Andréau’s centralized Terminal | at Charles de Gaulle International
Airport, Roisy-en-France (1974), demonstrates how air terminals had evolved into large
complex megastructures that were purely sys-tems to deal with enormous numbers of
travelers. The air terminal type embodied an inevitable romanticism about flight and
movement in contrast with the reality of scale and flexibility in an environment subject to
rapid unrelenting change.

Aircraft have changed enormously since that first flight at Kitty Hawk, North
Carolina, in 1903. The changes in commercial aircraft design over the 34 years that
separate the Douglas DC-3 (1935) from the Boeing 747-100 (1969) have been
staggering; airports raced to keep up with the new aircraft and airline needs. The much
increased seating capacities, safety, reliability, speed and range of aircraft lowered costs
and increased the popularity of air travel, which encouraged ever greater numbers to fly;
in turn, airport terminals around the globe were confronted by new pressures to expand
facilities. The one constant factor in airport terminal design was change—swift,
unrelenting, and unpredictable. Airport terminal design is a contest between the rival
claims of centralization and dispersal, between providing minimum passenger walking
distances on the landside and dispersal on the airside to take advantage of the
maneuverability of airplanes.

The challenge of mass air travel in the 1990s led to the building of extremely large
terminals to handle upward of 35 million passengers per year in an unprecedented
expansion of airports around the world that culminated in a stunning new architectural
synthesis. This new generation of terminals were hugely complex, giant high-tech steel
sheds that responded to the demands of extreme efficiency and a renewed emphasis on
architectural expression. Indeed, it is hardly an original observation to say that much as
train stations were the great popular monuments to 19th century industrialism, in the 20th
century, these extraordinary airport terminals similarly express the pinnacle of 20th
century achievement in architecture and construction.

The new terminals are almost cities unto themselves, albeit rampant metropolitan
fragments, populated by hoards of transient nomads. The introduction of lightweight tent
and tensile forms in Saarinen’s elegant terminal at Dulles International Airport,
Washington, D.C. (1962), and later in the new Haj Terminal, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
(1978), and at Denver, Colorado (1995), and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (1998),
international terminals reinforced this incipient nomadic connection.

Whether the strategy of building ever-larger terminals proves effective and they are
the forerunners of even larger terminals in the future, or whether other factors—air traffic
density, weariness of the traveling public—intervene to limit size, time alone will tell.
The great size and cost of the new terminals may yet prove to be their undoing. Of all the
new building types to emerge in the 20th century, and notwithstanding the skyscraper,
these new terminals speak more vividly and eloquently than any other mass movement by
peoples across the globe. Starkly contrasting with the tragic events of the 20th century,


the horizontal steel-and-glass terminal is a cathedral whose standardized open space,
immersed in light, encapsulates mankind’s dream of freedom.

The earliest airline routes—both national and international—began across Europe in
spring 1919. The first generation of airfields was primitive, little more than grassy
fields—unobstructed flat surfaces used for recreational purposes at the weekend or for
military training and parades. The Dugny-Le Bourget (Paris) and Croydon (London)
airports, which opened in 1920, signaled the arrival of second-generation airports having
purpose-built terminals, the beginning of the concept of the modern air terminal complex.
The second-generation terminal, unlike the earlier primitive landing fields, comprised a
multifunctional building that was normally separated from the hangars and workshops
but that usually incorporated the control tower. Except for this control tower, the building
had a low profile to avoid obstructing flight passes, and the roofs were designed on the
airfield side as flat platforms for use by the public at air shows.

Terminals often resembled grandstands with tiered viewing terraces for the public to
watch air shows. More monumental than necessary, in Europe, architectural
overstatement was usually a product of local ambition or national pride. The air terminal
and modern architecture thus emerged concurrently. Terminal architecture was frequently
uncompromisingly modern, with examples such as the Schipol International Terminal
(1928) by Dirk Roosenberg serving as models. Schipol had an L-shaped layout, with a
tall control tower as a central feature and roof terraces for visitor viewing. The
importance of the tower was typical: At Lyon’s V-shaped terminal by Antonin Chomel
and Pierre Veriere (1930), the control tower is on the corner and advances toward the
field, and at Birmingham (1939), by Graham Dawbarn and Nigel Norman, the tower
sprouts sheltering wings on either side.

Gatwick terminal (1936), designed by Hoar Marlow and Lovett, was circular, with the
control tower mounted on top in the center. It had rail-mounted telescopic passageways
connected to the gates of the beehive to protect passengers from the weather and from
propellers. Gatwick was the first airport with a railway connection, and it initiated the
satellite concept for airport terminals. Significantly, Gatwick’s canvas passageways
connecting to aircraft are precursors of modern telescopic passenger-loading bridges or
jetties.

The postwar terminals coincided with the engineering and machine aesthetic of
modern architecture as expressed succinctly by Le Corbusier in —_ (1923), in which he
dedicated an entire chapter to airport architecture. Aircraft fascinated other architects as
well. Erich Mendelson sketched a hangar with workshops for airships and airplanes in
1914, and Peter Behrens designed an airplane factory at Henningsdorf near Berlin (1915)
for AEG. In the 1926 film a rooftop airport was included on top of a tower, and in 1932
Andre Lurcat suggested building airports in the River Seine, Paris. Manmade islands to
service transatlantic airplanes were proposed, an idea that, 70 years on, was realized in
the futuristic artificial island airports of Kansai (1994, Osaka Bay) and Chek Lap Kok
(1997, Hong Kong).

Stansted Airport exterior, Essex, England, designed by Norman Foster
and Partners (1981-91)
© Ken Kirkwood. Courtesy Foster and Partners

In the United States air services were started by the Post Office, which developed and
operated an airmail service from 1918 to 1925. After the passage of the contract Air Mail
Act of 1925, many private entrepreneurs and companies entered commercial aviation.
The history of American air transport policy contrasts with that of Europe, where the
responsibility for forming airlines, building navigation aids, and constructing airports
nearly always rested in the hands of each country’s central government. In America
airport designers generally simulated ideas from the architects and engineers of railway
terminals, combining the best of railroad station design with important airport elements
that became common features in later decades. On occasion, a regional style was chosen
for terminals, such as in San Francisco (1937) and Albuquerque (1939).

After 1927 increases in flight movements and passenger capacities and the weight of
commercial aircraft placed new demands on concepts for the buildings and for the entire
airfield and caused the third generation of airport construction. Expensive take-off and
landing strips with paved surfaces, standard at all airports in the United States since 1928,
now became mandatory in Europe. Usually, four or more strips were planned to respond
to varying wind directions. The airport at Bromma near Stockholm became the first to be
so equipped. Doubts now arose about the common practice of building on the periphery,
and in 1929, the French proposed the idea of a wedge-shaped building zone projecting
forward from the edge of the airport into the center of the airfield, leaving more than 80
percent of the edge undeveloped.

The introduction of flying boats in the 1930s led to the construction of amphibian
airports on coasts, such as the International Air Terminal and Dinner Key Seaplane Base
at Miami (1934) and Marine Air Terminal, LaGuardia Airport (1939), where one could
transfer to a land airplane. The 1930s saw some striking terminal buildings erected, such
as Ramsgate Municipal Airport (1937) by David Pleydell-Bouverie in Great Britain.

Resulting from the tremendous advances in aviation made during World War II and
the introduction of new types of commercial aircraft carrying 80 to 100 passengers,
existing arrival and departure halls were rendered inadequate. Airport construction and
modernization was delayed in the immediate postwar period and only got going properly
in Europe in the 1950s. The frontal system or transporter configuration of terminal design
dominated: Aircraft stood out on aprons, separate from the terminals, and passengers had
to walk out across the tarmac to the planes. The Zurich International Airport (1953) by
Alfred and Heinrich Oeschger is typical of this fourth generation of airports. Other
examples are Heathrow (1956, London) and Orly (1961, Paris), which had a terminal
located at the center with two fingers on either side, stretching 2,300 feet from end to
end.

Finger- and star-shaped terminals arrived in the 1950s in the United States and soon
afterward in Europe. The terminal at London’s Gatwick Airport in 1958, a rectangular
building with a single finger, was the first example of a fifth-generation airport, with two
more added in 1964; Rome, Milan, Copenhagen, London, and Amsterdam soon adopted
the system. Toronto airport (1961) in North America and Geneva’s Cointrin airport
(1968) and the Cologne-Bonn airport (1970) in Europe are leading examples of satellite
terminal design.

The basic assumption inherent in fifth-generation airports—minimum distances
between landside and airside—came under great pressure in the 1970s when international
terrorism surfaced. Since then, airports have been subject to strict safety regulations.

The main feature of the next, sixth, generation of airports, dealt with the terrorist threat
by applying the bottleneck principle, with the arrival and departure halls once again
centrally located (often on separate floors), in combination with a strict division between
the “secure” area and the “open” area. As a consequence, well-designed terminals assure
a discreet transition from public area to a zone of differentiated security, thereby avoiding
any feeling of restricted freedom.

The 1990s brought a climax in terminal design with the creation of some 40 major
new terminals around the globe, replacing older obsolete facilities for cities as far apart as
Osaka, Hong Kong, Bilbao, London, Paris, Inchon, Barcelona, Seville, and Shanghai.
Although they are very varied architecturally, they share many common features; namely,
great size, openness, lightweight construction, high-tech detail of structure and services,
and a new lyrical freedom. The new high-tech megaterminals frequently combine
extensive areas of retail, hotel and conference facilities, bars, and movie theaters. At a
minimum, the 1990s terminals are the products of a 40-year evolution and, hence, bring
together many existing trends in a striking new synthesis. Constructional ingenuity and
bravado, large, curved, roofs, the application and celebration of advanced technology—
all this and more has been applied obsessively to every facet of terminal performance.
Although the dominant high-tech expression was not confined to air terminal design,
there is an immediate appropriateness about its use. Sir Norman Foster and Partners, Sir
Richard Rogers, and Renzo Piano, as well as a host of other designers and followers,
were inspired by 19th-century English industrial buildings, and more critically, by Sir
Joseph Paxton’s 1851 Crystal Palace.

Foster and Partner’s Stansted Airport in Essex, England (1991), is such an example.
Stansted is a single-level building that incorporated an evenly spaced grid of columns that
is clearly and intentionally reminiscent of Mies van der Rohe’s steel-andglass pavilion

concept. Its plan was for an elegant and directionless neutral terminal with a detached
satellite in a flat English landscape, a step farther on from his previous Sainsbury Center
for the Visual Arts at Norwich (1978), which resembles an aircraft hangar.

The new airport at Kansai, which was designed by Renzo Piano Building Workshop
and that opened in 1994, displays with great authority the characteristic features of
contemporary airport architecture such as scale (it has a 1.7-km-long departure lounge),
planning complexity, engineering prowess, and technological splendor. Kansai was the
first airport of its size (it was designed to handle 25 million passengers a year) to be
developed entirely on a man-made island. The architect anticipated later terminal designs
by exploiting open, curvaceous roofs that are ecologically sound and by using natural
light to mark the passenger routes through the terminal. It is a multinodal transportation
center as much as an airport.

Hong Kong’s new Chek Lap Kok (1997) terminal, also by Foster and Partners,
planned for 35 million passengers per year and extended the architectural language of
Stansted. The roof has a 36-meter structural grid and appears from above as a cutout
silhouette of a plane. On three main levels between two parallel runways, Chek Lap Kok
also has train and expressway links to Hong Kong.

The 1990s generation of megaterminals, although they make the most of available
technological resources, push beyond mere technological expression: They seek to
become more “natural” and less artificial as they acquire an outdoors-indoors character,
making the most of natural light and ventilation. This trend may be the result of
technology fatigue, the onset of boredom with technology in isolation, and an
acknowledgment that people require a deeper, more meaningful, relationship with natural
things for harmony and balance. It is not surprising to find terminal designers using
words such as “calm and visual clarity” to express their aims.

PHILIP DREW

Dulles International Airport, Chantilly, Virginia; Foster, Norman (England); Haj

Terminal, Jeddah Airport; Hong Kong International Airport, Hong Kong; Kansai

International Airport Terminal, Osaka; O’Hare Airport, Chicago; TWA Airport Terminal,
New York

Further Reading

The literature on airport design and architecture is extensive and far ranging, which
makes it difficult to approach. Much of it is of a highly technical nature, on planning and
engineering and transportation, environmental impact, and sound problems. For
information on design standards, refer to De Chiara (1990) and Edwards (1991).
Technical standards are continually being revised and updated, so it is important to
confirm the applicability of information. In 1937 the Royal Institute of British Architects
(RIBA), London, held an exhibition on airport design and published an accompanying
catalog, as did the Art Institute of Chicago (see Zukowsky, 1996). For a good
introduction to the extensive literature, see Binney (1999), who provides information
alphabetically on 46 new terminal projects. On airports before 1940, the Council of
Europe-sponsored Raphael program monograph on Tempelhof, Speke, and Le Bourget
(2000) is most useful, complemented by Zukowsky for the American account.

Paris: Havas, 1961
Paris: Editions du patrimone, 2000
(exhib. cat.), London: Royal Institute of British Architects, 1937
Ashford, N.J., and P.Wright, © New York: Wiley, 1991
Binney, Marcus, Chichester: Academy Editions and John Wiley, 1999
Blow, Christopher J., New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1985
Bode, Stephen, and Jeremy Millar (editors), — London: Photographers Gallery, 1997
Ceerver, Ascensio, Arco for Hearst Books, 1997
De Chiara, Joseph, and John Callender, 3rd edition, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990
Doganis, R., | London: Rutledge, 1992
Edwards, Brian, London: E and FN Spon, Rutledge, 1991
Horonjeff, Robert M., and F.X.McKelevey, 3rd edition, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983
Jahn, Helmut, edited by Werner Blaser, Boston: Birkhauser, 1991
Powell, Kenneth, London: Fourth Estate, 1992
Whitelaw, J. (editor), London: Thomas Telford Publications, 1995
Wickens, A.H., and L.R. Yates (editors), London: Chapman & Hall, 1995
Wilkes, Joseph A., Vol. 1, AIA, New York: Wiley, 1988
Wilkinson, Chris, Oxford: Butterworth Architecture, 1991
Zukowsky, John (editor), | Munich and New York: The Art Institute of Chicago and Prestel-
Verlag, 1996

ALLIANCE FRANCO-SENEGALAISE

Designed by Patrick Dujarric; completed in 1994 Kaolack, Senegal

With his project for a new French cultural center in rural Senegal, architect-
anthropologist Patrick Dujarric gave a new twist to an indigenous architectural style. The
Alliance FrancoSénégalaise that he completed in 1994 in Kaolack, links a vernacular
tradition to a new decorative program. Kaolack is a rural city, with a population of
approximately 150,000, that lies 160 kilometers southeast of Dakar in west-central
Senegal on the right bank of the Saloum River. French cultural centers in West Africa
ostensibly act to promote and disseminate French culture and language, but they are also

important venues for showing African art forms, from films to paintings. With
reinvention of local architectural traditions, the Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise makes c.

government but is also a local community center.

Colonial-style buildings, Dujarric’s work is both French and Senegalese.

its
ear

that this building does not simply house an institution affiliated with the French

Senegal is a former French colony, and Dujarric is a longtime resident. He completed
this project in 1994, the client being the Mission de Cooperation et d’Action Culturelle.
Unlike French cultural centers in Dakar and Saint-Louis du Senegal that are housed in

The plan for the center is loosely modeled on an African village or compound.
(Although the project borrows eclectically from several West African artistic traditions,

the ethnic groups most prominent in this region are Sereer, Wolof, and Djola.) 1
complex comprises three main blocks that are separated by courtyards and that
themselves have open-air courts. The main block houses the administrative and public

The

exhibition areas. It also contains the center’s office, an exhibition hall, a library, and

audiovisual and pressrooms. Two courtyards puncture this main block, bringing air and
light to the interior spaces.

A smaller block contains four classrooms. Three small courts separate the classrooms
and can be used as additional lecture space. The third element is an open-air theater that
can be used for many purposes, such as showing French newscasts, screening films, and
presenting live performances.

Anyone visiting the center is immediately awestruck by its profuse decoration. The
decoration is sometimes geometric, as many of the walls, piers, and columns are painted
with stripes. It is sometimes figural, showing people and animals in scenes derived from
local graphic traditions. Although the graphic forms are traditional, many of them are
traditional to nonarchitectural art forms, such as pottery and textiles. In a move that is
unusual today, patterns cover almost all visible surfaces. Dujarric decorated everything:
floors, walls, ceilings, and columns. Such an exuberant profusion of decoration is
associated with Gothic, Byzantine, and Islamic religious architecture but is rare in
modern secular buildings.

Reviewers of the project (many of whom were French) have frequently claimed that
Dujarric’s Kaolack structure was an architectural embodiment of French literary
Poststructuralism. The building itself, because of its elaborate decorative program, was a
“text” that had to be read and interpreted by viewers. According to many critics, the
postmodern decoration and graphics act as an interactive text, inviting visitors to create
their own textual and visual meanings. For a building that houses and exhibits a variety of
media, the structure itself has become a form of media. Architecture is thus integrated
into the larger realm of popular art and graphics.

In addition to the local iconographic programs that it draws on, the Alliance building
incorporated another traditional artistic practice: the use of perforated walls. walls are
a feature of Tukulor houses and mosques, and their open-air grillwork treats light as a
raw material that can be transformed into patterns. When light patterns move across
already decorated planes, surfaces come alive, and painted figures dance, thus imbuing
graphic representations with video-like qualities.

This project was one of the recipients of the 1995 Aga Khan Awards for Architecture.
Previous rounds of the Aga Khan Awards, in 1983 and 1986, had recognized few modern
buildings, and traditional buildings dominated the winners. This left the awards program
open to criticism (from such notable Aga Khan jurors as Mehmet Doruk Pamir and Hans
Hollein) that it was reactionary, anti-modern, anti-Western, and antitechnology. The
Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise puts much of that criticism to rest, for it is a project that
grows out of local traditions yet houses modern functions and uses new materials.

The materials of this low-budget project include terrazzo floors in which stones from
the Thiés region provide local color. Cement block can no longer be considered a modern
or foreign material, for much of the architecture around the Kaolack region is made from
it. Dujarric ingeniously created columns by pouring concrete into PVC pipes that were
then richly painted with horizontal stripes. The project is economical not only with its


Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise, Kaolack, Senegal, designed by Patrick
Dujarric (1994)
© Aga Khan Trust for Culture

materials but with its energy costs as well. It is not airconditioned but relies on
crosswinds, ceiling fans, and shaded areas to keep the place cool and well ventilated.

The largely favorable reviews that Dujarric has received for this building suggest a
need to see new kinds of architecture that grow out of African traditions. Successful or
not, this building does affirm that Africa is not importing modernity from the West but,
rather, is creating its own.

MARK HINCHMAN
Aga Khan Award (1977-); Hollein, Hans (Austria)

Further Reading

“1995 Aga Khan Awards for Architecture,” (May 1996)

“Aga Khan Awards,” 198 (November 1995)

“Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise, Kaolack, Senegal,” (September 1997)
Chaslin, Francois, “Palmares Aga Khan 1995,” 303 (February 1996)

ALUMINAIRE HOUSE

Designed by Albert Frey; completed 1931

Long Island, New York

Designed by Albert Frey and Lawrence Kocher and completed 1931, the Aluminaire
House represents one of the earliest examples of European-inspired Modern architecture
in the eastern United States. The Aluminaire was one of only six American buildings
chosen by Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Phillip Johnson in 1932 for the New York
Museum of Modern Art’s International Style exhibition and book, and of those six, it was
the only private residence other than Richard Neutra’s Lovell House (1927-29). Like the
Lovell House, the Aluminaire represented a merger of advanced building technology and
advanced architectural expression, and as such, it exemplified many of Le Corbusier’s
five points of architecture. This was mainly the result of the contributions of Albert Frey,
a Swiss-born designer who worked in Le Corbusier’s studio before imigrating to the
United States in 1930. Co-designer Lawrence Kocher, a Beaux-Artstrained architect from
California, was managing editor of at the time of his partnership with Frey, and it was
through the journal’s contacts that the firm received the Aluminaire commission.

Designed for the 1931 Allied Arts and Building Products Exhibition in New York, the
Aluminaire House was intended as an attention-getting display to draw in the public.
Eventually, more than 100,000 visitors toured the full-scale model of what the architects
described as “a House for Contemporary Life,” filled with light and air
(“alumin”+“aire”). To be occupied by a couple living near a city, the house contained a
covered porch, entrance hall, boiler room, and garage on the ground floor; a kitchen,
living and dining rooms, bedroom, bathroom, and exercise room on the second floor; and
a skylit library, toilet, and terrace on the third floor. As a model dwelling, the Aluminaire
was intended as a prototype for prefabricated housing that, if produced in adequate
quantities (10,000 units),, would have been relatively low cost ($3,200). As a three-story
block with ribbon windows, a roof garden, and freely composed facades, the Aluminaire
House had much in common with a building that Frey knew firsthand: Le Corbusier’s
detached single-family house (1927) in the Weissenhofsiedlung (the exhibition of
domestic modern architecture initiated by the German Werkbund in Stuttgart). If the
Aluminaire lacked the spatial complexity typical of a Corbusian it nonetheless fea-
tured a combination living and dining area that stretched the full width of the house, with
a double-height ceiling above the living space. This gave the house a feeling of openness
despite its small size, a perception augmented by folding screens and translucent
partitions that transformed individual rooms into flexible, multiuse spaces.


Aluminaire House, Syosset, New York, designed by Albert Frey
(1931)
© RIBA Library Photographs Collection

Using lightweight skeletal construction, the house was erected in the exhibition hall in
less than ten days. All building materials, many of which were experimental, were
donated by national manufacturers eager to associate themselves with modern
architecture. Of these materials, aluminum and steel were prominent in the structure and
fittings. Six five-inch aluminum pipe columns set in concrete supported the entire weight
of the building, with many columns left exposed. Fastened to the columns was a
framework of channel girders and steel beams supporting steel floor decking and stee:
stairs. Steel-framed windows were used throughout the house, as were steel-faced,
chrome-trimmed doors, including the overhead doors of the drive-through garage. The
non-load-bearing, exterior walls were only three inches thick, consisting of a steel frame,
wood nailers, and insulation board. They were sheathed in three-foot panels of corrugated
aluminum fastened with aluminum screws and washers. Practically, the panels’ vertical
corrugations added rigidity, and the polished surface deflected the sun’s rays, but they
also gave the Aluminaire a desirable metallic sheen and a gloss of the modern.

A similar effect was evident inside in the nontraditional details and finishes. Fabrikoid
covered the walls in the living spaces, and black Vitrolite clad those in the bathroom.
Neon tubes running above the windows lit the interior with dial controls, allowing the


occupant to adjust the level and color of illumination. The house also featured built-in
metal, glass, and rubber fixtures designed by Kocher and Frey to save space and
minimize maintenance. Beds were suspended from metal cables. A combination china
cupboard and retractable dining table had legs on wheels to allow easy extension. A suite
of air-filled rubber chairs could be deflated for easy storage; although never fabricated,
these designs anticipated the inflatable furniture of the 1960s.

Public response to the Aluminaire House was generally positive, as evident in the
extensive coverage the house received in the general and architectural press in the early
1930s. Local journalists were impressed with its ease and rapidity of construction,
dubbing it the “zipper” and “magic” house and heralding it as a portend of future
dwellings. In (1934), British architect F.R.S.Yorke praised the weather-resistant
qualities of its laminate wall structure and noted that its design was well adapted to
standardization.

After its display at the Allied Arts exhibition, the Aluminaire House was dismantled in
only six hours and transported to Syosset, Long Island, to the estate of architect Wallace
K.Harrison, who had purchased it for $1,000. In the spring of 1931, it was reerected as
Harrison’s weekend retreat, but it was structurally compromised because of construction
delays. Harrison altered the house during the next decade, adding two one-story
additions, enclosing the roof deck, and relocating it to a hillside site that transformed the
first floor into a basement. The Aluminaire gradually deteriorated in the ensuing four
decades, and in 1986, after the Harrison estate was sold, it was threatened with
demolition. Although the Harrison estate was listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the Aluminaire House itself did not have the individual local listing needed to
ensure its protection. Largely through the efforts of Joseph Rosa, an architect research-
ing a book on Albert Frey, the architecture community in New York City rallied to save
the Aluminaire House, deeming it too significant a landmark of American modernism not
to be preserved. In 1987 the house was moved to the Central Islip campus of the New
York Institute of Technology, where, under the auspices of the School of Architecture,
the Aluminaire is gradually being reconstructed and restored to its original condition.

GABRIELLE ESPERDY

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret Charles-Edouard) (France); Hitchcock, Henry-Russell

(United States); International Style; Johnson, Philip (United States); Lovell Health

House, Los Angeles; Neutra, Richard (Austria); Weissenhofsiedlung, Deutscher
Werkbund (Stuttgart, 1927)

Further Reading

“Aluminaire: A House for Contemporary Life,” (May 1932)

Jandl, H.Ward, Washington, D.C.: Preservation Press, 1991

Rosa, Joseph, “A.Lawrence Kocher, Albert Frey, The Aluminaire House, 1930-31” 11 (April
1990)

Rosa, Joseph, | New York: Rizzoli, 1990

Yorke, F.R.S., | London: Architectural Press, 1934; 8th edition, 1957

ALUMINUM

Aluminum is such a ubiquitous material in 20th-century architecture that it is hard to
appreciate how relatively late it came on to the scene. Aluminum had considerable
advantages, including its light weight, its malleability, its corrosion resistance, and its
alloyability for special properties. For the first third of the 20th century, however, it had
to compete with similarly reliable materials, especially steel. Nevertheless, aluminum
was seen as a thoroughly modern material without historical associations, making it
indispensable to the Modern movement. This did not preclude some designers from using
the material for historicist styles, but its functional role in architecture kept pace with
architectural design and building technology.

The particular strengths of aluminum were proven during World War II in a wide
range of applications. However, after the war, the primary producers put aluminum into
large-scale market development to advocate for its use in all sectors, architecture being
no exception. In fact, by 1965 an estimated 905,000 tons of aluminum were used in
building construction in the United States, more than in any other field of application.
Aluminum’s most significant and specific contributions to 20th-century architecture have
been in windows, storefronts, and curtain walling. Aluminum has also been widely
employed in decorative features and hardware, windows and doors, and siding for a range
of structures.

Although aluminum had been known for much of the 19th century, one of its first
architectural uses was for the capping of the Washington Monument (Robert Mills,
1884). Aluminum was introduced commercially after 1886, when American Charles Hall
and Frenchman Paul Héroult independently and almost simultaneously discovered that
alumina, or aluminum oxide, would dissolve in fused cryolite, which could then be
decomposed electrolytically to become a crude molten metal. A low-cost technique, the
Hall-Héroult process remains as the major method used for the commercial production of
aluminum.

Another early application of aluminum in architecture came in 1891, when Burnham
and Root used the material for the interior fittings of the Monadnock Building (1889-91)
in Chicago. In 1897 Raffaele Ingami used unalloyed aluminum sheets with aluminum
rivets to surface the cupola of the Church of San Gioacchino (1897) in Rome. In the same
year in Montreal, the Canada Life Building (Brown and Vallance, 1897) was finished
with a decorative aluminum cornice. In all these cases, the metal was used as a practical
substitute and did not contribute significantly to the design.

The Austrian Otto Wagner developed the use of aluminum as a deliberate and specific
architectural feature in his Post Office Savings Bank (1904-06) in Vienna. He used
aluminum bolts to hold the exterior marble panels, and he used aluminum for interior
cladding and details, such as the grilles and vents. Although it would be some 30 years
before the material came into the mainstream of architecture, Wagner’s designs
represented a breakthrough and began to establish aluminum as a modern material, one
that could be associated with the ideals of modern architecture, including technology and
theories of modernism.

Despite these early precedents, aluminum’s large-scale application as a constructive
and decorative architectural material was developed most significantly during the 1930s.

Even in Pittsburgh, the aluminum capital of the United States, the tower of the Smithfield
United Church (Henry Hornbostel, 1926) used aluminum, but still only as a substitute for
other metals and in a design that was strangely traditional and imitative.

Modernist architects began to value aluminum as a building material with vast
potential. With the development of steelframed skyscrapers and curtain walls, architects
used aluminum for glazing bars and spandrels. Aluminum could save space, reduce
weight, and shorten building time. Aluminum’s strengthto-weight ratio meant that thinner
and lighter sections could be used for spandrels and windows, thus significantly
increasing rentable floor area. In addition, these elements could be prefabricated and
hoisted into position on-site, thus saving considerable time and money over conventional
materials. These factors were directly related to considerations of industrial building and
mass production of component parts. Many skyscrapers were fitted with aluminum
spandrels in the 1930s, including the panels of the Empire State Building (Shreve, Lamb
and Harmon, 1930). The Daily Express Building (1931) on London’s Fleet Street by Ellis
and Clarke combined glazing bars with glass panels. Another noteworthy use of
aluminum was in the fabrication of storefronts and window frames. During the 1930s, the
American Kawneer Company developed extrusion technology that was particularly
appropriate for fabricating metal windows and storefronts. The combination of reduced
maintenance, technical efficiency, and ease of assembly encouraged the use of
prefabricated aluminum components.

These applications to commercial buildings were paralleled by experiments in housing
and space frame architecture. In 1931 the Aluminaire House was erected by Lawrence
Kocher and Albert Frey as a demonstration building within the Allied Arts and Building
Products Exhibition in New York City. The house was built using aluminum-pipe
columns and panels fixed on the

et nd attest bateh i

Alloy girders support the framework of the Dome of Discovery, for the
1951 Festival of Britain. (Photograph taken July 1950.)
© Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORBIS

interior frame with screws and washers. The Aluminum Company of America subsidized
the aluminum parts, probably with the intention of developing another area of aluminum
application. In the late 1920s, Buckminster Fuller intended his 4D house to be fabricated
from aluminum alloys, which at that time were yet to be developed. By the early 1930s,
new heat-treated alloys were available, yet Fuller’s experimental ideas were not accepted
by the American Institute of Architects (AIA), where prefabrication in domestic building
was disfavored. These early attempts at prefabrication did nonetheless set a precedent for
later postwar architects who produced a range of prefabricated buildings that employed
aluminum in many different applications.

This potential for prefabrication and portability was developed after World War II. For
example, the British aircraft industry produced 86,000 prefabricated bungalows using
aluminum as the main material immediately after 1945, and in America after 1940 the
National Homes Corporation designed and manufactured prefabricated houses using
aluminum cladding and roofing. The prefabrication ideal was also used in England for
schools and portable buildings. During the 1950s, a British firm developed the supply of
prefabricated, pressed, aluminumframed huts for use in rural areas of Africa.

After World War II the aluminum companies began promoting their material for use in
construction and architecture. In 1947 the R.S. Reynolds Company, a specialist
aluminum supplier, set up a Memorial Award, which was offered by the AIA for
architects who “made the most significant contribution to the use of aluminum
aesthetically or structurally, in the building field.” Notable examples of award winners
include I.M.Pei’s 88 Pine St., New York (1974), Philip Johnson’s Pennzoil Place (1978),
Foster and Partner Hong Kong Shanghai Bank Headquarters (1986), and Helmut Jahn’s
United Airlines Terminal, Chicago (1988). In France, the work of Jean Prouvé (who had
already developed an interest in aluminum prior to 1940) was greatly enhanced when, in
1949, the French trade association L’aluminium Francais purchased an interest in his
workshop. He used aluminum curtain walls for the Féderation Nationale du Batiment
building in Paris and continued to develop aluminum components for commercial,
residential, and overseas commissions.

The demand for “space frames” grew with a demand for exhibition halls, aircraft
hangars, warehouses, and storage facilities. One of the most elegant solutions for space
frames was the dome. The Festival of Britain’s Dome of Discovery (1951) was fabricated
mainly from extruded triangular lattice aluminum framework and, at a span of 110
meters, was the largest aluminum structure at the time. By the later 1950s, the American
Kaiser Aluminum Corporation was developing a prefabricated dome system that use
shaped panels to create domed space frames. Structures, with a diameter of 145 feet and
able to hold up to 2,000 people, could be erected in a matter of hours. A gold-anodized
Kaiser dome was erected in Moscow in 1959 for a U.S. cultural and industrial exhibition.

Although these structural uses of aluminum were impressive, the most successful
postwar application was undoubtedly the further development of the curtain wall. The
aluminum-clad 30-story Alcoa Building (1950) in Pittsburgh by Harrison and
Abramovitz was the lightest permanent office building of its size in the world at one time
and required approximately less than half the constructional material of a similar building
that used structural steel in the framework. In Chicago, where skyscraper curtain walls of
the post-World War II era consisted of stainless steel, rusting steel, and glass, Naess &


Murphy’s Prudential Building (1955) was significant not only for its temporary status as
the city’s tallest building but also for its limestone and aluminum facade.

Modern Japanese architects have also embraced the material. Arata Isozaki’s
Prefectural Museum of Modern Art (1971-74) in Gunma and the Museum of
Contemporary Art (1981-86) in Los Angeles make extensive use of aluminum panels.
The use of aluminum as a component in the structure of buildings continued in the 1970s,
especially as an element of High-Tech style. The works of Norman Foster, including the
Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts (1977) at the University of East Anglia and his
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank (1985); parts of the Lloyds Building (1979-87) in
London by Richard Rogers; and the outer frameworks of I.M.Pei’s Bank of China (1990)
in Hong Kong exemplify this trend.

Aluminum is now a standard and unexceptional material for buildings. It has been
specified for cladding, roofing, and interior applications of all kinds, including partitions,
ceilings, ducting and trunking, grilles, and hardware fittings, including gates grills,
balcony rails, lamp casings, and ornamental and practical fittings of all kinds.

CLIVE EDWARDS

Aluminaire House, Long Island, New York; Empire State Building, New York;

Foster, Norman (Great Britain); Fuller, Richard Buckminster (United States); Isozaki,
Arata (Japan); Prefabrication

Further Reading

Aluminum Company of America, Pittsburgh: Alcoa, 1932

Aluminium Development Association, A symposium on aluminium in building. (Proceedings)
Convened by the Aluminium Development Association and held at the Royal Institute of British
Architects, London: July 9-10, 1959

Dorre, E., et al., Berlin and New York: Springer Verlag, 1984
Dwight, J., London: Publisher E.F. and N. Spon, and New York: Routledge, 1999
Hornbostel, C., New York: John Wiley, 1991

Lane, J., | Aldershot, England: Ashgate, 1992

Northern Aluminium Company, — London: The Company, c. 1952

Peter, J., and P. Weidlinger (editors), 2 vols., Louisville, Kentucky: Reynolds Metals Company,
1956

Simpson, Tracy, Oakland, California: Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Sales, 1968

Van Horn, Kent R., 2 vols., Metals Park, Ohio: American Society for Metals, 1967

ALVAREZ, MARIO ROBERTO 1913-

Architect, Argentina

Mario Roberto Alvarez is considered one of the most prominent and prolific
representatives of the rationalist approach to architecture in Argentina. Born in Buenos
Aires on 14 November, 1913, he graduated with a degree in architecture from the
University of Buenos Aires in 1937. He worked first at the Ministry of Public Works and

later become a municipal architect for Avellaneda City. Alvarez opened his architectural
office in 1947, when the modernist ideas were firmly established in Latin America. Ever
since, his practice has been characterized by the variety, quantity, and solid
professionalism of his work.

His most refined and important contribution is The Municipal Theater General San
Martin, designed in association with Macedonio Oscar Ruiz (1960) and located on
Corrientes Avenue, the area of spectacles and theaters. The facade has a curtain wall that
announces adherence to a functional and rational approach, articulated with a marquee
that makes a subtle reference to the history of the area. The lobby is one of the best
examples of high modernism in Latin America. This space, which echoes some of the
developments in Brazilian modernism at that time, combines tilted columns supporting
the suspended volume of one of the auditoriums. It also incorporates a flying staircase
and a large mural, as well as modernist furniture and rich materials.

The entire complex, with four auditoriums dedicated to experimental theater,
contemporary dance, and chamber music, incorporated the best stage equipment and
technology available at the time. The interior spaces of the auditoriums are characterized
by a calm artistic sensibility that relies on the combination of very few materials while
using elongated, sweeping lines and lighting. The complex was later extended and
connected to the San Martin Cultural Center (1970), also designed by Alvarez. The
cultural center is located in a very dense urban area, and the entrance incorporates a dry
plaza that opens up the space of the old Spanish colonial grid.

The studio also expanded some of the finest cultural institutions of the country, among
them the prestigious Col6n Theater (1968) and the Cervantes National Theater (1969),
both in Buenos Aires.

By the 1970s, the firm Alvarez and Associates, had acquired a reputation for
incorporating modern technology in its rational approach to design problems. This
approach was further explored with the SOMISA building (1975), a technological
challenge, as it was the first building in the world completely welded together.

Alvarez was always very conscious of the effect of a building in the environment. This
is exemplified by the Galeria Jardin (1983), a commercial center located on Florida Street
at the core of the city center. The complex has an underground garage, with three levels
of shops and offices, and also includes two towers with offices and apartments. The basic
parti revolves around the idea of opening an internal street, which was unified by two
submerged patios opened up to the sky and to natural light. The complex is linked
visually and functionally by stairs and balconies, thus enriching the urban fabric with this
refuge in the core of the block.

Among several towers designed by Alvarez, one of the most remarkable is the IBM
building (1983). The IBM headquarters is located in the Catalinas Norte area, the
gateway to the metropolis from the estuary of the river. The tower is in the middle of a
hub of relevant buildings from the turn of the century, including corporate headquarters,
monuments, and parks.

The solution is a highly sculptural yet simple type that follows the tripartite model of a
base, a middle, and a top, which exemplifies Alvarez classical affinities. However,
Alvarez incorporates subtle reflections on the theme. The building aesthetic is
characterized by the distinction between the circulation of the areas served. The tower is
related to the site by an elongated, pure platform forming a base. The prism of the tower


is linked to the platform by the elevator shafts’ smaller volume, generating the impression
that the tower is floating. The fenestration recedes and the horizontal bands of concrete
slabs composing each floor give the building its dynamic simplicity. A clean and
powerful entablature ends the composition.

The conscious expression of the structure, care for the programmatic requirements,
and the ascetic elegance of the interiors characterize most of the multistory flats, health
centers, and office buildings designed by Alvarez’s studio. One of the most significant
landmarks in the Buenos Aires skyline is Le Pare tower. Forty-six stories high, it is one
of the tallest towers in South America (1995). Instead of the typical Miesian rectangular
prism used in many of his other projects, Alvarez approaches this structure differently.
The floor plan is expressed in volume through balconies and circulation. The highly
articulated yet restrained facade is the result of interior variations needed to provide sun
and views. The expressive richness of this tower comes from the joints in the exposed
concrete and from the marks left by the shuttering bolts securing the formwork.

Instead of radical transformation, Alvarez’s philosophy has been to explore a limited
set of forms as variations of a theme: to do more with less. His work was immune to the
sweeping changes and explorations of the 1970s and to the notions of fragmentation,
historical allusion, or the search for complexity and richness of meaning. Alvarez’s
production remained involved in solutions that advanced an uncompromising classicist
attitude. His work belongs to a generation that absorbed most of Ludwig Mies van der
Rohe’s contributions and adopted them to a country with a developing economy.

After more than 50 years of professional work, innumerable awards, and many
competitions won, Alvarez’s studio remains committed to a stable, gradual evolution
instead of revolutionary changes in architecture. His extensive work is an accrued
reflection on some of the tenets of high modernism. As with many other rationalist
architects, his practice is an ascetic and rigorous search that aspires to order and
continuity.

JOSE BERNARDI
Argentina; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany)

Biography
Born in Buenos Aires on 14 November 1913. Graduated with a degree in architecture in
1937, and opened his architectural office in 1947. Honorary member of the AIA since
1976, his office is one of the most prestigious in Latin America.
Further Reading

Alvarez, Mario Roberto, [Argentina]: M.R. Alvarez, c. 1993

AMBASZ, EMILIO 1943-

Architect, Argentina and United States

Emilio Ambasz is an Argentinia-born architect and designer whose international
design and architectural projects have made him a significant contributor to the history of
contextualized modernism in 20th-century architecture.

After completing military obligations, Ambasz applied to universities in the United
States and (with the recommendation of Williams) entered Princeton University under a
Palmer Fellowship to the School of Architecture as a freshman in 1963, placed in the
junior-year design studio his first semester, and switched to the first-year graduate
program his second semester. He completed his studies as a graduate student, receiving
his professional degree (a Master of Fine Arts) in two years, having been waived from the
undergraduate curriculum, and joined the faculty in 1966. Appointed as a lecturer,
Ambasz was promoted to assistant professor during 1966-69. In 1968 Princeton awarded
him the Philip Freneau (Class of 1771, Poet of the Revolution) Preceptorship, established
in 1949 as a bicentennial endowment to provide three years of research funds in
recognition of scholarship. In addition, he served as a visiting professor at the
Hochschule fiir Gestaltung in Ulm, Germany.

Ambasz drafted the charter for the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies
(IAUS) in New York while on the faculty at Princeton and served as its deputy director,
dividing his time initially after joining the Architecture and Design Department of the
Museum of Modern Art of New York in mid-1969, where he served as its curator of
design from 1970 to 1976. His philosophical manifesto for design as the basis of
interdisciplinary discourse was articulated in “Institutions for a PostTechnological
Society: The Universitas Project” (1971), a working paper produced under the joint
auspices of both the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies and the Museum of
Modern Art, from which several of his published writings were subsequently drawn.
Derived in part from the thought of Argentine philosopher Tomas Maldonado, Ambasz’s
work postulated the complementary nature of science and design, where the former deals
with the given (to reveal order) and the latter seeks to alter the future (to create order).

The Museum of Modern Art’s design collection reflects Ambasz’s vision of dialectic
between American high technology and the value-added qualities of European design. In
addition, he initiated several milestone exhibitions on architecture and industrial design.
“Italy: The New Domestic Landscape” (1972) was not only a comprehensive
investigation of the 1960s effect of Italian product design but also an intellectual
challenge to design “boundaries.” It included the designed conversion of the objects’
shipping containers into exterior display kiosks that populated the Museum of Modern
Art’s Garden Court, effectively extending the exhibition beyond its programmed domain.
His exhibit “The Architecture of Luis Barragan” (1974) reintroduced a minimalist
modernism at a time when the historicist revivalism of postmodernism was


Lucile Halsell Conservatory, Main Courtyard (1987), San Antonio,
Texas, designed by Emilio Ambasz
© ART on FILE/CORBIS

emerging yet emphasized the Mexican architect’s lyrical and symbolic underpinnings. In
“The Taxi Project” (1976), Ambasz developed a “performance specification” for urban
taxis and, in a manner similar to his “Italy” show, called on industry to respond with
prototypes anticipating the “smart cars” of the late 1990s.

In 1976 Ambasz represented the United States in the Venice Biennale, the first of
many subsequent international exhibitions of his work. This coincided with the formal
opening of his firm, Emilio Ambasz & Associates, and the first of a series of design
awards in the program of the journal awarded to his design for the Grand Rapids
(Michigan) Art Museum. This building combined adaptive re-use of an existing Beaux
Arts building, contextual urban revitalization, and reformation of the building with the
intervention of an abstract transparent inclined planar roof, filling the interior of its C
shape and creating a major interior public space. At the same time, this building served as
a symbolic sign for the museum and an allegorical reference by means of a water cascade
over this roof surface.

Ambasz has characterized himself as an inventor. His design work has essentially
straddled the boundaries of a “critical” discourse, at all levels of its definition. This
embraces the tradition of Le Corbusier’s notion of normative standards and architectural
projects as prototypes of larger issues as well as Amancio Williams’s belief that
architecture is a creative act, postulating alternative models to the present condition. In a
method that combines the rational and the lyrical, and quoting Walter Gropius, “Develop
a technique, then give way to intuition,” Ambasz asserts that he does not design with
words; instead, he is a maker of images.

Ambasz’s images, moreover, might best be characterized as a fundamental purism
characterized by a process of extreme reduction in which the object aspect of the
architecture disappears, or at least nearly vanishes, through integration with the

landscape. As a basic leitmotif of his work, this idea represents more than merely a
philosophical giving back of the land that the building occupies. It is a strategic gesture to
address the crisis of the object in mid-1980s design, to do away with the edifice. It
becomes the frame from within which to harness the site, as in much of the visual arts of
the preceding decades.

Among Ambasz’s works are the Fukuoka Prefectural International Hall (Fukuoka,
Japan), a Janus-like building addressing its urban streetfront and embracing an existing
park at its rear, which literally ascends the 16-story building, a theme extended in his
Phoenix Museum of History (Arizona) and the Myca Cultural and Athletic Center (Shin-
Sanda, Japan). Landscapein-building include the Union Station (Kansas City) and the
Nichi Obihiro Department Store (Hokkaido, Japan), where interior spaces become great
winter gardens, as if the landscape had developed internally. Building-in-landscape are
the Schlumbeger Research Laboratory complex (Austin, Texas), the House for Leo
Castelli (East Hampton, New York), the Lucille Halsell Conservatory (San Antonio,
Texas), Thermal Gardens (Sirmione, Italy), the Baron Edmond de Rothschild Memorial
Museum (Ramat Hanadiv, Israel), and the Barbie Doll Museum (Pasadena, California); in
all cases, these are fundamentally underground earth-sheltered structures as well as
“marked sites” in which man-made structures emerge from a seemingly continuous
landscape.

Projects that emphasize an aformal strategy of change and indeterminacy include the
Center for Applied Computer Research (Mexico City, Mexico), the New Orleans
Museum of Art (Louisiana), and at an urban scale, the Master Plan for the 1992 Universal
Exposition (Seville, Spain), which incorporate floating structures in a parklike setting or
themes of evolution grounded in a rigorous armature whose fabric is intended to
incorporate variety or actually devolve, such as with the Cooperative of Mexican-
American Grape Growers (California) or “Pro Memoria” Gardens (Ludenshausen,
Germany).

Ambasz’s career includes design in graphics, installations, and products for which he
holds a number of patents. His industrial design has involved formulating the process
from concept through manufacture: design, detail, patent, tools, and product. Often, there
is a mechanical invention fundamental to the concept: the “Vertebra” furniture series
(included in the design collections of both the Museum of Modern Art and the
Metropolitan Museum of Art) involved a dynamic reconfiguration to adjust to position,
further extended in the “Vertair” series, which developed a patented upholstery system
that expands and contracts. Ambasz has a wide range of products, from toothbrushes to
mechanical pens, including the development of diesel engines as chief design consultant
to Cummins Engine since 1980.

In 1989 he was featured in an exhibition, “Emilio Ambasz: Architecture,” at the
Museum of Modern Art (which traveled through 1995) and subsequently a one-man
show, “Emilio Ambasz: Architecture, Exhibition, Industrial and Graphic Design,” which
was designed by Shigeru Ban and traveled from 1989 to 1991. Although his work
continues to be published, particularly internationally, his products and graphics are
recognized by awards (several have also been accessioned to the Design Collection of the
Museum of Modern Art).

A citizen of Monaco with several international residences and offices in New York
and Bologna, Italy, Ambasz continues his production despite the demands of practice. In


his publications, no projects are dated, and it is never clear whether they were built. In a

sense, this is the essence of Ambasz: to leave behind a Chinese puzzle that appears as one

thing but that contains complex interlockings to be revealed and discovered by others.
PETER C.PAPADEMETRIOU

Biography

Born in Resistencia, Argentina, June 1943. Received master’s degree in architecture from
Princeton University, New Jersey. Curator of design, Museum of Modern Art, New York
1969-76. Taught at Princeton University, Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh,
and Hochschule fiir Gestaltung, Ulm, Germany. Exhibition, the Museum of Modern
Art, New York 1972.

AMERICAN FOURSQUARE

“American foursquare” refers to a house type that is little recognized in traditional
architectural history sources yet is visible in virtually any urban neighborhood developed
during the period 1900-40. Despite its lack of official approval, this hardy survivor was
far and away the dwelling of choice for generations of people with modest means
constructing or purchasing homes. The design was eminently practical: it was spacious, it
was passably attractive, and it was cheap.

Variously called “Builder’s Houses,” “American Basic,” “Square Houses,” “Box
Houses,” “double-deckers,” “double cubes,” “American Farm Houses” (something of a
misnomer, since the vast majority of these homes were built in cities and suburbs), or,
because of their sheer numbers across the land, “National Houses,” the houses themselves
remain clearly boxlike in their design.

The foursquare design is often not truly square. In its rectilinear proportions, low-
hipped roof, square plan, and simple facades, the foursquare resembles early prairie
houses of the Midwest made popular by the Prairie School architects. As American cities
grew, land values soared. Urban blocks were jammed with narrow lots, usually rectangles
with the short side abutting the street. Thus, the foursquare could often be somewhat
narrower in front and back and have longer sides to accommodate the site. As cities
expanded, urban—and finally suburban—growth allowed greater flexibility in building.
The foursquare house, once removed from the strictures of cramped, rectangular lots,
usually grew in size and, in the process, frequently became more ornamented. As a rule,
box houses located closer to traditional “downtowns” tend to be smaller and less ornate
than those found in outlying neighborhoods and suburbs.

The essentially cubelike shape is the initial indicator of the type. The American
foursquare is an efficient, self-contained box. No matter how many bays, wings, porches,
or other appendages the house might offer, the basic shape of the building should be
apparent. In addition, broad, overhanging eaves follow the upper perimeter of the
building, providing shade for the second story and the bedrooms therein and a settled

look for the house as a whole. The rooflines growing from these extended eaves are
usually pyramidal. Unlike more expensive homes, chimneys are seldom of any great
aesthetic importance and are often made of concrete or brick. A large front dormer,
usually hipped like the roof, serves as a trademark and helps provide light and air to the
attic sections.

Windows are simple in both arrangement and presentation, usually standard, mass-
produced, double-hung models that can

American Foursquare house, Lynchburg, Virginia, architect unknown
(1919)
© William H. Young

be opened for maximum ventilation. As a rule, the lower half is a sheet of plain glass; the
upper portion usually consists of smaller panes grouped in one frame and divided by thin
muntins. In some of the more unadorned box houses, even the upper half of the window
is a single glass pane, further reducing costs. Because these homes were designed more
for utility than for architectural or stylistic purity, the windows are often irregularly
spaced, thereby serving the interior of the house in the allimportant admission of light
and air in the most efficient way.

Virtually every foursquare has a porch across its front. Decorative style for this
appendage varies, from a simple raised floor with an equally simple roof over it to
elaborate classical columns and railings that support an ornamented roof complete with
garlands, friezes, and fancy shingles.

A major selling point of the box house was its interior arrangement. Because these
homes are normally two-story structures, the first floor contains a spacious living room, a
formal dining area, a den, and an airy, well-equipped kitchen with pantry. The second
floor commonly consists of four large bedrooms, each with its own closet. Finishing off
this emphasis on livable space is an attic that offers either storage or the potential of still

more rooms. A full basement—or “cellar,” as they were usually called at the time, a
dank, dark hole beneath the dwelling with a bare earth floor and no living amenities
whatsoever—typically houses the furnace and accompanying coal bin and little else.

As this immensely popular residential style gained momentum with buyers, it moved
from its initial simplicity to ever-more applied decoration. Plain clapboard or stucco
walls evolved into brick or shingle facades, and vestigial turrets, towers, and bays
sprouted out of the basic cube. The hipped roof might feature a widow’s walk at its apex,
or a balustrade might appear above the broad overhanging eaves.

Catalogs of simple plans—usually done by draftsmen, not architects—flooded the
market, offering, in essence, a massproduced house to anyone. Sears and Roebuck,
Montgomery Ward, Aladdin, Gordon Van Tine, and a host of other merchandisers had
long offered dwellings in kit form, and their box-style houses promptly became some of
their most popular models.

Following World War II, the style was completely eclipsed by innumerable tract
subdivisions that seemingly sprang up everywhere. The box house never achieved a
comeback, but in its brief 40-year history it has left its mark nonetheless. How many
thousands and thousands of box houses were built will never be known, but their legacy
endures in myriad ways. In many eastern American cities, the foursquare house—in sheer
numbers of extant structures—remains the dominant residential design.

Historians have at times attempted to link the origins of the box house to Federal-style
townhouses and to aspects of Italianate design and have even suggested that the
foursquare is really a reborn Georgian mansion, one more suited to the tastes and means
of the middle class. Although each of these theories contains an element of truth, each
also tends to overlook the pragmatism of the basic box house. The foursquare house, as
found in most of the nation’s cities, stands as the triumph of vernacular design on a
massive scale.

The foursquare house might find little space in the annals of American residential
design, but it has had a lasting impact on perceptions of what constitutes adequate
housing. In the early 20th century, middle-class Americans wanted more spacious homes
and larger lots. The box-type house satisfied both desires: substantially larger than most
other dwellings then available, the foursquare in turn required more land. More than has
been realized, the foursquare helped define both urban and suburban housing needs
throughout the country.

WILLIAM H. YOUNG
Prairie School

Further Reading

Definitive studies of the American foursquare await writing. Aside from brief mention in
larger works, the style has received little scholarly or popular attention. The following
books acknowledge the style and its popularity among homebuyers. Little attention,
however, is paid to the architectural qualities of foursquare design.

Baker, John Milnes, | New York: Norton, 1994

Gowans, Alan, New York: Icon Editions, 1991

McAlester, Virginia, and A.Lee McAlester, New York: Knopf, 1984

Schweitzer, Robert, and Michael W.R.Davis, Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State
University Press, 1990

AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS

The American Institute of Architects (AIA) is an organization that sought, in its infancy,
to bring a degree of professionalism and recognition to certified architects in the United
States. When the organization was established in 1857, few people understood the role an
architect plays in the design of new buildings, and engineers and construction workers
often assumed the design role in building projects of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. The role of the AJA continues today in coordinating a degree of both
professional and ethical conduct among members, offering recognition for well-designed
projects, and working to continue the development of architects in the United States.

In the middle of the 19th century, architects were few in number, and most of those
were unskilled. With westward expansion, towns bloomed into cities in a haphazard
fashion, and a new “Stick style” of architecture took hold throughout the United States.
Where the flat-roofed brownstone residential row houses of New York or the Greek
Revival along the Atlantic coast had been popular, builders’ patterns now emphasized an
asymmetrical plan, lively outline, and the use of thin wooden framing. This Stick style
represented the skilled carpenter—a populist view of architecture. Professional architects,
located mainly in the larger eastern cities, organized a defense against the informality of
plebeian style.

A new architecture, oriented to future change, was taking shape in the United States. It
grew rapidly and found wide acceptance. “In the new world, there was less resistance
imposed by an earlier culture or social order. Industrial and engineering progress were
equated with national development. The enthusiasm for major engineering works was
whetted by continental expansion, especially in the field of transportation. In building it
was furthered by the lack of a hard and fast professional line between architecture and
engineering,” wrote Frederick Gutheim in

The blurred lines of architecture and engineering led to the establishment of the
American Institution of Architects in 1836, founded by a talented artist and architect,
William Strickland. He and five other skilled designers met in New York to organize the
institution. Although the group never became active, it is seen as the forerunner of the
AIA. Thomas Walter, an original member of the 1836 group, helped found the AJA in
New York City in 1857 along with Alexander Davis, also an original member of the 1836
group, and 12 other architects. Richard Morris Hunt, the first American to study at the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, was one of the spirited 12 architects at the first AIA
meeting in 1857.

According to historian Spiro Kostof, Hunt and other founders of the AIA “pitted the
cultured, disciplined procedures of the architect against the free-wheeling creativity of
builders whose do-it-yourself philosophy they considered a threat to their status.”

Although the Ecole encouraged creativity, a strict academic curriculum emphasized
design principles and professional acclimation. Promoting training, accreditation, and


overall professionalism, Hunt sought to bring the formal training of the Ecole to the
United States, where training was less organized or codified. The first school of
architecture, housed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1865, was modeled
on the Ecole. By 1868, the first architectural journal began publication in Philadelphia.

As the AJA took hold, bringing professional standards to certified and licensed
architects, they met engineers on an intellectual battlefield. With engineers, they fought
over the science—the “how,” or the mechanics—of building design. Where engineers
sought to limit creative expression, architects sought an increasing scope of control in
architectural design.

This battle came to a head after the U.S. Civil War when the country worked at
rebuilding. In Washington, D.C., the rebuilding occurred not only through physical
buildings but also through the image that the country hoped to project to countries
abroad. Modeling the official architectural styles of Paris and London, the federal
government of the United States led the way in boastful public architecture. Thomas
Walter designed the dome for the U.S. Capitol building in which he simulated the
overwrought classicism of Second Empire Paris, and this new monumentalism fit the
federal presence.

National headquarters building for the American Institute of
Architects, designed by T.A.C. (The Architects Collaborative) (1973)
© Emest and Kathleen Meredith/GreatBuildings.com

As technology advanced, architects were faced with the subsequent challenges of
mechanization within architectural building and design, for example heating, air-
conditioning, lighting, and power systems. Moreover, according to Gutheim,
industrialization of the building industry (factory-produced windows, spandrels, roofing,
flooring, equipment, and other elements designed by others) as well as increasingly
stringent tests of comparative economy, operating performance, or standards set by

hospital administrators, military engineers, educators, and other specialists complicated
matters.

In the early part of the 20th century, architects were concerned with a range of public
and institutional buildings—banks, libraries, schools, business offices, and hospitals;
increasingly, however, the importance of these designs extended beyond the limits of the
building and its construction. School buildings were seen as community institutions as
well as educational centers. Libraries came to reflect amenable, open plans devoted to
free access to learning. The informality of family life led to increasing influence on
nonpublic buildings, such as residences.

“Architects are also dealing with clients who are frequently inexperienced, often
confused, and unprepared to recognize the time and cost required by good building,”
states Gutheim. This is where the AIA aids its members in professional development and
services to promote the field of architecture in the United States. In keeping with this
spirit, the AJA has instituted an AIM (Aligning the Institute for the Millennium) program.
In a call for a culture of innovation, AIM is redefining the mission of the AIA and
developing “Seven Core Values” to identify what architects and the industry can expect
of the AIA in the future, including architectural education, knowledge delivery, and
advancement.

LISA A.WROBLE

Further Reading
Gutheim, Frederick, (exhib. cat.), New York: Reinhold, 1957
Kostof, Spiro, New York: Oxford University Press, 1985

Wilson, Richard Guy, | New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984

AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

Although not the seat of government, Amsterdam, in the province of North Holland, is
the acknowledged capital of the Netherlands and, until World War II, was its
architectural leader. Its local professional groups—Architectura et Amicitia, De 8, and
Groep 32—were successively at the forefront of innovation, and despite the subsequent
evaporation of regional hierarchies, the city has retained its prominence. Its inclusive and
diversified buildings, especially those from the first third of the century as well as from
its final decade, are endowed with a specifically local flavor, even when responding to
more global design trends. Amsterdam’s watery foundations (many of the buildings rest
on wooden pilings) and extensive network of canals and islands, no less than its
distribution into distinctive quarters, ensure its unique character. Although 20th-century
structures are interspersed among the picturesque remnants of the older city, the majority
of these buildings were planted in an encircling girdle that extends dramatically but
deliberately from the historic core. In Amsterdam, chronology and geography coalesce:
for the most part, one can recognize the era of construction from the location.


After the Golden Age of the 17th century, the cosmopolitan and prosperous harbor
city became a somnolent town with a declining population until belated industrialization
and the construction of international canals and railways commenced in the late 19th
century and Amsterdam awoke to an expansive future, with concomitant woes (a
desperate housing shortage, ruthless demolition, tactless road building, and the filling in
of canals and open space) and wonders (prosperity generating provocative new
construction). Thanks to the National Housing Act (Woningwet) of 1901, which required
Dutch municipalities to provide extension plans and building codes (which in Amsterdam
included aesthetic prescriptions), the city’s development proceeded responsibly. Initially,
the main augmentations were southward, but eventually rings of buildings surrounded it
in all directions. In the 1920s, Amsterdam was called the “Mecca of housing”; its social
democratic administration insisted that dwellings answer artistic demands, serve the
community, and embody the cultural aspirations of the working and lower-middle
classes. Housing has continued to be the dominant building type.

Although at the turn of the century eclecticism ruled in Amsterdam as elsewhere, two
contrasting yet complementary buildings signaled a fresh start. One was the vast Bourse
(1897-1903) by H.P.Berlage, its sources in medieval architecture and the theories of
Gottfried Semper and E.E. Viollet-le-Duc transformed by Berlage’s personal quest for a
universal language suitable for all programs and viewers; the other was the American
Hotel (1898-1902) by Willem Kromhout (1864-1940), a more playful design
incorporating Byzantine and Arabic motifs as well as Romanesque. Both are unusually
monumental for the time and place, with corner towers that anchor and announce their
presence in the cityscape. Each is constructed from Amsterdam’s traditional material:
unplastered brick (glowing red in a large “cloister” format for the Bourse, pale yellow
and slender for the hotel) with stone trim kept within the sleek plane of the masonry
walls. The elevations and plans obey a proportional system intended to harmonize the
parts with the whole, characteristic of Amsterdam practice. Gifted applied artists
executed the details and contributed to the interiors, which are representative of Nieuwe
Kunst, the geometric and restrained Dutch version of Art Nouveau. A third building, the
imposing polytonal masonry headquarters (1919-26) for the Dutch Trading Company
(Nederlandsche Handelsmaatschappij, today ABN-Amro Bank), extended this aesthetic
into the 1920s. The concrete-frame construction, rare at the time, was articulated by
projecting vertical piers that unite five stories, an American formula seen previously only
in the Scheepvaarthuis (1912-16; see Amsterdam School). Its theosophically inclined
designer, K.P.C.de Bazel (1869-1923), one of the first Dutch architects to employ
proportional systems, further interpreted his contemporaries’ goals in a personal manner
in his housing projects for the municipality and the philanthropic organization De
Arbeiderswoning.

Berlage was the author of the first modern extension, Amsterdam Zuid (South); in
1915, he exchanged his picturesque plan of 1905 for a more formal and practical layout
to accommodate large-scale housing. The formula behind his acclaimed design, executed
mainly between 1917 and 1927, was “in layout monumental, in detail picturesque”
(Berlage quoted in Fraenkel, 1976, 46), meaning individualized and intimately scaled;
discrete neighborhoods were composed of turbine plazas, winding streets, and perimeter
blocks, often enclosing communal gardens, with the typical Amsterdam arrangement of
floor-through dwellings ranged to either side of entries and stairs, creating a vertical


punctuation in the long facades. These smaller urban units were woven into a larger
tapestry of avenues leading, in Berlage’s original vision, to major public structures. The
latter were replaced by four-story multiple dwellings, but since these were designed
mainly by the Amsterdam School, the grandeur, exuberance, and luxury associated with
institutional buildings invigorate the housing and the accompanying schools, shops,
communal bathhouses, branch libraries, bridges, electrical transformers, and so on that
form an integral part of Amsterdam Zuid. A stylistic and typological anomaly in Plaz
Zuid is the Wrightian Olympic Stadium (1926-28) by Jan Wils (1891-1972), who was
briefly a member of De Stijl.

Other important districts created in the period during and immediately after World
War I under the guidance of the dynamic director of housing Ary Keppler include the
Spaarndammerbuurt north of the railroad tracks, best known for Michel de Klerk’s
dwellings for the workers’ housing society, Eigen Haard (1915-20), but with interesting
ensembles for other such organizations established by union members with government
support, most notably Zwanenhof (1915-20) by H.J.M.Walenkamp (1871-1933). On
reclaimed land north of the IJ estuary (Amsterdam Noord), a series of garden suburbs
with more conventional two-story row housing offered an alternative to the denser matrix
of Amsterdam Zuid. A significant municipal experiment of 1921 was Betondorp in
Watergraafsmeer, annexed by Amsterdam in that same year, where a number of different
systems employing concrete for rapid and cheap construction were tested. Some 1,000
dwellings were added to the housing stock; some of the experiments provided useful
precedents, while others proved but temporary expedients. Architects included those of
Amsterdam School persuasion, such as Dirk Greiner (1891-1964) and Jan Gratama
(1877-1947), and budding functional-ists, such as the Haarlem-based J.B.van Loghem
(1881-1940).

Amsterdam’s belt of new extensions, with buildings firmly defining streets and
squares, was scornfully decried as the “stone city’ by a younger generation touched by
the ideas of Le Corbusier, the Bauhaus, and CIAM (Congrés Internationaux
d’Architecture Moderne). In 1927 these polemicists founded De 8 and issued a manifesto
denouncing the putatively antiutilitarian and defiantly aesthetic schemes then dominant
and demanding the introduction of Zakelijkheid (Nieuwe Bouwen in the Nether-lands).
The most distinguished examples of this tendency in Amsterdam comprise the school and
cinema by Johannes Duiker; the glazed Apollohal (Apollolaan, 1933-35) by A.Boeken
(1891-1951), a founder of Groep 32; the steel-framed, unplastered brick atelier dwellings
with artists’ studios combining single- and double-height spaces (Zomerdijkstraat, 1934)
by P. Zanstra (1905-), K.L.Sijmons, and J.H.L.Giesen; and the strikingly transparent
“Drive-In Dwellings” with garages below (Anthonie van Dijkstraat, 1936-37) by Mart
Stam, Lotte StamBeese (1903-), W.van Tijen (1894-1974), and H.A.Maaskant (1907-—
77). Buildings that also display modern materials and functionalist concepts but that,
while devoid of Amsterdam School decorative flourishes, have a distinctly local rather
than international character include the brick “Wolkenkrabber” (Amsterdam’s first
“Skyscraper”; Victorieplein, 1930), its glazed stair separating the two apartments on each
floor designed by an apostate from the Amsterdam School, J.F.Staal (1879-1940), and
the curvaceous white National Insurance Bank (Apollolaan, 1937-39) by Dirk
Roosenburg (1887-1962).


De 8 had published proposals to replace perimeter blocks with Germanic open-row
housing and four-story tiers of dwellings with high, horizontally layered flats accessed by
galleries or corridors and served by a single stair or elevator. When Cornelis van Eesteren
designed the AUP (Algemene Uitbreidungsplan [General Extension Plan]) of 1934, he
likewise envisaged tall slabs standing free in parklike settings and, according to CIAM
prescriptions, segregated the city according to use: dwelling, working, recreation, and
transport. Although World War II prevented complete realization, his scheme guided
development until the late 1980s: Bos en Lommer (1937 and later, by De 8 members Ben
Merkelbach [1901-61] and Ch. Karsten [1904-79]) and Frankendael (1947-51, by
Merkelbach and Karsten and Merkelbach and P.Eilling [1897-1962] with Mart Stam) are
examples of such worthy but architecturally undistinguished solutions.

In the postwar period, only on occasion did modernists escape tired formulas. The
curtain wall appeared first in 1959 in the unusually elegant Geillustreerde Pers
(Illustrated Press) headquarters by Merkelbach and Stam. Reconstruction focused on
social housing, and the strict economic guidelines enforced by a government bureaucracy
led to monotony and mediocrity. The culmination of CIAM thinking was the enormous
southeastern housing estate Bijlmermeer (1962-73), designed by the Municipal Housing
Service. This dispiriting honeycomb of concrete high-rises was linked to the center by the
Metro, a remarkable feat of engineering of the 1970s that unfortunately did far more
damage to Amsterdam’s fabric than the Nazi occupation. The precepts that produced
Bijlmermeer were finally repudiated in the scheme by OMA (Office for Metropolitan
Architecture, led by Rem Koolhaas) for the Ijplein in Amsterdam Noord (1980-82). Like
Berlage’s Amsterdam Zuid, variety was naturally achieved by employing different firms
to execute the plan, which consists of tall blocks in the western sector and low-rise
buildings in the east, producing a successful mix of housing types conforming to OMA’s
neomodernist stance.

By the 1960s, editors of the journal urged reform. Aldo van Eyck (1918-99)
criticized the sociologically driven soulless modernism that had blighted his country,
called for “labyrinthine clarity” (ordered and logical complexity), proposed theories that
drew inspiration from the African Dogon and the Casbah, emphasized the importance of
intimacy and the thresholds between public and private space, and envisaged the city as a
large house and the house as a small city, thus challenging Amsterdam’s inert and self-
contained enclaves. After designing many ingenious playgrounds throughout the city, he
realized his ideals in the acclaimed but flawed Burgerweeshuis (City Orphanage, 1960,
no longer used as such), a miniature townscape of domed units of concrete and brick
scaled to its small inhabitants. A subsequent movement, Structuralism, was formed by
sympathizers such as Herman Hertzberger (1932-), whose Le Corbusian Studentenhuis
(Student Dormitory, 1959-66), which combines social and dining facilities with living
quarters and a common terrace (a street in the sky), exemplifies this approach; within the
compound, a matrix of large and small rooms offers points where social encounters, often
accidental, can enrich daily life.

Since the mid-1980s, there has been an explosion of exciting new architecture in
Amsterdam, comparable in magnitude and inventiveness to the period between 1915 and
1934. Postmodernism is alien to Amsterdam, although the neo-Expressionist,
ecologically prescient “sand castle” that houses the NMB (today ING) bank (1979-87) by
A. (Ton) Alberts (1927-1999) and M.van Huut might be categorized as such, in that


Alberts has revived the anthroposophical organicism of the early 20th century. Instead, an
exuberant, triumphantly contemporary and quintessentially Dutch architecture has
reappeared. Housing projects are again a cause for celebration, no longer constrained by
politically correct but architecturally lifeless requirements. Redeveloped sites such as
Kattenburg and Wittenburg (post office and flats by A.W.van Herk and S.E.de Kleijn,
1984) and KNSM-, Java-, and Borneo-Eilanden (the harbor’s decline left the islands free
for other uses) display housing less indebted to modernist dogma and more to vernacular
and Amsterdam School sources, although Nieuwe Bouwen is not forgotten (towers and
slabs by Wiel Arets [1955-], J.Coenen [1949-], and Sjoerd Soeters [1947-], among others,
1988-96). Clusters of colorful and individualistic apartment blocks by firms such as
Atelier Pro (who inclusively invited six foreign firms to provide facades for their housing
development on the site of a former Army Barracks on the Alexanderkade, 1988-92) and
Mecanoo (housing estate Haagseweg, 1988-92) reinvigorate the city and reinforce the
identity of particular places. There has been a return to four- or five-story buildings
organized according to the traditional Amsterdam entry system (Nova Zemblastraat by
Girod and Groeneveld, 1977), each with its own distinctive details and massing,
vigorously plastic with dramatic projections in plan and elevation. Wood and aluminum,
as well as steel and stucco, often brightly painted, have joined brick, tile, and concrete as
popular materials. Equally significant is the reconfiguration of older buildings—
warehouses, arsenals, grain silos, customs houses, churches, and canal residences—for
new purposes, again mostly residential; effectively active here is J.van Stigt (1934-).
Amsterdam thus completed the century as it began: simultaneously socially responsible
and architecturally on the cutting edge.

HELEN SEARING

Amsterdam School; Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Berlage, Hendrik Petrus

(Netherlands); De Stijl; van Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands); Hertzberger, Herman
(Netherlands)

Further Reading

The bibliography in the Dutch language is huge but is specialized in terms of building
types, time periods, and issues of urbanism and preservation; several items take the form
of annotated guide books in Dutch and English. There is also a plethora of publications
issued by the municipality, especially the Departments of Urban Planning (Stedebouw)
and of Housing (Volkshuisvesting). Since 1986 ARCAM (Amsterdam Center for
Architecture) has regularly commissioned a series of pocketbooks in English on various
topics concerning the buildings of the city.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam Physical Planning Department, 1983

Bock, Manfred, Jet Collee, and Hester Coucke, edited by Martin Kloos, Amsterdam:

Architectura and Natura, 1992
Forgeur, Brigitte, | London: Thames and Hudson, 1992

Fraenkel, Francis Frederik, Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands: Canaletto, 1976 (with
English summary)
Gemeentelijke Dienst Volkshuisvesting, Amsterdam: Bureau Voorlichting Gemeente

Amsterdam, 1975

Groenendijk, Paul, and Piet Vollaard, (bilingual English and Dutch edition), Rotterdam:
Uitgeverij 010, 1986; 4th edition, 1992

Haagsma, Ids, and Hilde de Haan, Anna de Haas, H.J.Schoo, Utrecht: Spectrum, 1981

(exhib. cat.), Delft: Delft University Press, and Amsterdam: Stedilijk Museum, 1983

Huisman, Jaap, Michel Clans, Jan Derwig, and Ger van der Vlugt, Amsterdam: Architectura en

Natura, 1999

Kemme, Guus (editor), Amsterdam: Thoth, 1987; 4th edition, 1996

Kloos, Maarten (editor), Amsterdam: Architectura en Natura, 1994

Kloos, Maarten (editor), Amsterdam: Architectura en Natura, 1995

Kloos, Maarten (editor), Amsterdam: Architectura en Natura, 1997

Kloos, Maarten, and Marhes Buurman (editors), Amsterdam: Architectura en Natura, 2000

Koster, Egbert, Amsterdam: Architectura en Natura, 1995

aulen, Francoise (editor), (bilingual Dutch-English edition), Amsterdam: Amstaerdamse

Feratie van Woningcorporaties, 1992

Roy van Zuydewijn, H.J.F.de, Amsterdam: De Bussy, 1969

Searing, Helen, “Architecture and the Public Works in Metropolitan Amsterdam,” 17 (1984)

Searing, Helen, “Betondorp: Amsterdam’s Concrete Garden Suburb,” 3 (July 1987)

Stieber, Nancy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998

AMSTERDAM SCHOOL

The Amsterdam School was comprised of Dutch architects active between 1910 and 1930
whose work was associated with Expressionism and promulgated by the publication
During World War I and for a decade thereafter, the striking and controversial work of
the Amsterdam School transformed entire portions of its eponymous city and influenced
architecture throughout the Netherlands. Although almost every building type was
addressed, the major monuments are governmentfunded ensembles of workers’ dwellings
arranged in perimeter blocks that brought a new scale to Dutch cities. Paradoxically,
although its members sought unique solutions for each commission, a readily identifiable
group style emerged, and collaborations were frequent. Characterized by a luxurious
fantasy and individualistic details, the work came under fire in the later 1920s from
proponents of the functionalist subsequently, the Amsterdam School was written out of
the literature. But in the 1970s, reevaluation commenced; many of the buildings have
been restored and once again are a magnet for architects and urbanists.

The cradle of the Amsterdam School was the atelier of Eduard Cuypers (1859-1927).
Working there at various times during the first decade were its future leader, Michel de
Klerk (1884-1923) and such important representatives as Johann Melchior van der Mey
(1878-1949) and Pieter Lodewjik Kramer (1881-1961). Other future acolytes in that
office who absorbed Cuypers’s credo that architecture was first and foremost an art that
must transcend, while serving the pragmatic realities of program and resources, included
G.F.LaCroix (1877-1923), Nicolaas Landsdorp (1885-1968), B.T.Boeyinga (1886—
1969), Jan Boterenbrood (1886-1932), J.M.Luthmann (1890-1973), and Dick Greiner
(1891-1964).


Cuyper’s peculiar synthesis of Austrian and German Jugendstil (Art Nouveau), British
Arts and Crafts, Belgian Art Nouveau, 17th-century Dutch architecture, and Indonesian
art appears in more abstract guise in all of their work. Better known architects of
Cuypers’s generation such as Willem Kromhout (1864-1940) and K.P.C.de Bazel (1869-
1923) also were admired exemplars but with the doyen of Dutch architecture,
H.P.Berlage (1856-1934), they had a more complicated relationship. In his one published
statement of 1916, de Klerk criticized Berlage’s work for its excessive sobriety and lack
of representational character in both materials and function. Yet they followed his use of
geometric systems to proportion plans and elevations, and in the late teens and early
1920s, Berlage worked with members of the Amsterdam School and responded to their
delight in piquant invention; his housing around the Mercatorplein (1925-27) indicates a
mutual regard.

Although the Amsterdam School, unlike its rival, De Stijl, embraced no specific
theoretical program, its members were united not only by stylistic practice and the
conviction that architecture was first and foremost an inclusive art that should be
aesthetically accessible to people of all classes, but also by training (many were
autodidacts or studied in courses outside the main professional school at Delft). To
understand the movement’s rapid and widespread—if short-lived—influence, it is
necessary to review several peculiarly Dutch institutions through which its “members”
exercised power. The club Architectura et Amicitia (A et A), founded in 1855, during the
teens and twenties was led by those sympathetic to the artistic ideals of the Amsterdam
School, whose work was privileged in its publications, especially (literally, “Turnings,”
but in the sense of departures or deviations), which under the partisan edi-torship of
Hendricus Theodorus Wijdeveld (1885—1987) appeared monthly from 1918 to 1928. The
club also held competitions and exhibitions that disseminated designs conforming to the
group’s aesthetic position; it was in a review of the display mounted by A et A in 1916
that the name __ first appeared in print.

Amsterdam’s municipal organizations also played a role. The Department of Public
Works was staffed by its adherents, as testified by the street furniture, bridges, public
baths, schools, and offices for city agencies that were designed and executed between
1917 and 1930. The Social Democrats responsible for housing policy in Amsterdam were
admirers, for they believed that the work of the Amsterdam School dignified the
neighborhoods of the working- and lower-middle-class families for whom they were
responsible. The Commission of Aesthetic Advice which passed judgment on exterior
design, also was dominated by its advocates, much to the chagrin of architects of other
stylistic persuasions, who often had to change their designs to conform to Amsterdam
School conceptions.

Multicolored brick and tile, quintessentially Dutch materials, were employed for
structure and cladding but used in unprecedented ways, in combination with concrete,
stone, and powerful new mortars, to create unique configurations that pulsate with
vitality. The dynamism of the modern metropolis inspired many of the formal strategies
employed by the Amsterdam School, yet vernacular, historical, and even naturalistic
references, as well as motifs from German and Scandinavian architecture and Frank
Lloyd Wright, leavened the imagery. This was a narrative architecture that used massing
and ormament iconographically, to contextualize each commission. Accusations of
irrationalism and facadism were exaggerated; when commissions allowed, interior spaces


were as ingenious as exterior envelopes and in each case expressed the realities of the
program. After 1925 socioeconomic events curtailed the extravagant conceits of the
Amsterdam School and led to a more repetitious and less imaginative vocabulary, but
during its reign in the Netherlands it was responsible for such remarkable buildings as the
Scheepvaarthuis, 1912-16 (by Van der Meij, Kramer, and de Klerk), and the housing
estates Eigen Haard, 1914-18 (de Klerk) and De Dageraad, 1919-21 (de Klerk and
Kramer), all in Amsterdam, plus the villas compromising Park Meerwijk, 1917, in
Bergen (Kramer, La Croix, plus J.F Staal [1879-1940] and Margaret StaalKropholler
[1891-1966], the Netherlands’ first female architect), the Bijenkorf Department Store in
The Hague, 1925-26, by Kramer, and the post office in Utrecht 1917-24, by Joseph
Crouwel (1885-1962).
HELEN SEARING
Amsterdam, Netherlands; Berlage, Hendrik Petrus (Netherlands); de Klerk, Michel
(Netherlands); De Stijl; Expressionism; Netherlands

Further Reading

Baeten, Jean Paul, Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 1994

Bock, Mantied (editor), Rotterdam: NAi, 1977

Casciato, Maristella, Rotterdam: 010, 1996

Fanelli, Giovanni, and Ezio Godoli, Florence: Centre Di, 1982
Frank, Suzanne S., Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1984
Mattig, Eric, and Jan Derwig, | Amsterdam: Architectura et Natura, 1991
Mieras, J.P., and Francis Yerbury, London: Ernest Benn, 1926

Destruction of Dreamland, Coney Island, Brooklyn, New York
©1911 Charles E. Stacy, Brooklyn, NY/Library of Congress

Pehnt, Wolfgang, | London: Thames and Hudson and New York: Praeger, 1973. Trans
J.Underwood and Edith Kuestner. Originally in German, Stuttgart: Gerd Hatje, 1973

Searing, Helen, “Amsterdam South: Social Democracy’s Elusive Housing Ideal,” (1980)

Searing, Helen, “Architecture and the Public Works in Metropolitan Amsterdam,” 17 (1984)

AMUSEMENT PARK

Amusement parks are controlled environments that entertain visitors through the
simulation of space, place, and experience. It is the element of control that is initially
most important in defining the building type because the amusement park presents itself
as a safe, and indeed sanitized, environment wherein conventionally dangerous or
arduous activities can be undertaken without fear of their consequences. The desire for
control leads to the necessity of simulating or fictionalizing each and every space and
event that the visitor to the park will experience. For this reason, amusement park
designers often treat their buildings and settings simply as film sets, facades that are
divorced from the function of their interiors and that are dismantled and changed at will.
In the early years of the 20th century, this transience was exacerbated by the fact that a
single designer was rarely responsible for more than one part of any park. In
combination, these factors render the task of determining who has designed the park, and
even its date of completion, difficult. This situation has changed in recent years, with
many respected architects, including Michael Graves, Robert Stern, Antoine Predock,
Frank Gehry, Robert Venturi, and Denise Scott Brown, accepting commissions for the
design of amusement parks and associated facilities (hotels and training centers). Major
20th-century amusement parks include Disneyland (1955) in Anaheim, Florida; Six Flags
over Texas (1961) near Fort Worth, Texas; Walt Disney World (1965) in Orlando,
Florida; Universal Studios (1970-80) in Los Angeles, California; Tokyo Disneyland
(1983) in Tokyo; and Fox Studios (1996-99) in Sydney.

One particular type of amusement park, the theme park, also rose to prominence in the
last half of the 20th century. The theme park is characterized by a limited set of well-
defined thematic boundaries. Typical theme parks include the Old Westflavored Knotts
Berry Farm (1940, 1970) in Anaheim, California; the theologically focused Bible World
(1975) in Orlando, Florida; the evolutionary-themed Darwin Centre (1995) in Edinburgh;
and the piratical Mundomar (1996) by Estudio Nombela on Spain’s Costa Blanca.
Despite these differences, the terms “theme park” and “amusement park” are often used
interchangeably to refer to any space that promotes enjoyment through simulation.

The origins of the amusement park are frequently traced to the 17th-century pleasure
gardens of England and France. One of the most famous of these parks was Vauxhall
Gardens in London, which first opened in 1661 and by 1728 contained mechanical rides,
parachute jumps, and balloon ascensions. Perhaps the most popular of these early
amusement parks was the Prater in Vienna, which became the site of the 1873 Vienna
World’s Fair and which featured both a primitive wooden Ferris wheel and one of the
first large carousels. However, although amusement parks first came to prominence in
Europe, it was in North America that they enjoyed their greatest success. One of the first
large American amusement parks was Jones’s Wood, which opened in New York in the
early years of the 19th century. Jones’s Wood comprised a loose collection of beer halls,
music


houses, viewing platforms, dioramas, and shooting galleries. Rapid development of the
surrounding areas forced Jones’s Wood to close in the late 1860s just as a new era in
amusement park design was beginning on nearby Coney Island.

In 1897 George Tilyou erected a walled enclosure around his Steeplechase ride on
Coney Island. This act of enclosing the site and controlling entry to his rides is regarded
as a defining moment in 20th-century amusement park design. Of similar significance is
Tilyou’s claim that if “Paris is France, Coney Island, between June and September, is the
World” (McCullough, 1957, 291). With this statement, Tilyou set in motion the 20th-
century amusement park obsession with spatial and cultural simulation. Tilyou believed
that by constructing replicas of famous building types from different parts of the world,
he could simulate the entire planet in such a way that it could be quickly, efficiently, and
safely experienced by large numbers of paying customers. Such was the success of
Steeplechase Park (1897) that two new Coney Island amusement parks, Luna Park (1903)
and Dreamland (1904), soon followed. Luna Park simulated a trip to the moon, and
Dreamland featured a number of attractions, including a partial reconstruction of Pompeii
(complete with simulated eruptions on the hour) and a six-story building where customers
could experience an office fire firsthand. Such was the success of this building type that
by 1919 there were more than 1,500 amusement parks in North America, although the
Depression saw this figure drop to barely 200 financially viable parks in the 1940s. It was
not until the 1950s that Walt Disney revitalized the industry with his themed zones
(Fantasyland, Adventureland, Frontierland, and Tomorrowland) and his focus on the
traditional values of middle America. The success of Disneyland at Anaheim saw a string
of similar Disney parks opened around the world, including EPCOT (1982) in Florida
and the more controversial EuroDisney (1992) near Paris. This friction between the
“real” and the “simulated” or “virtual” is evident in many recent amusement park
designs. At one extreme, amusement parks are increasingly producing more complex and
realistic electronic simulations. Virtual World (1981-92) in San Diego, California;
Acurinto (1996) in Nagasaki; and SegaWorld (1996-98) in Sydney each feature
extensive electronic, or video game, environments. In sharp contrast to this trend is the
rise in amusement parks that promote ecotourism as a “real” experience. Mitsuru Man
Senda’s Asahikawa Shunkodai Park (1994) and his Urawa Living Museum (1995) in
Urawa are examples of parks that advocate a “genuine” appreciation of the environment
or history of the “real world.” Ironically, in many respects each of these extremes is as

artificial as the other. The only difference is that in one environment the simulation is
glorified, whereas in the other it is repressed or hidden.
MICHAEL J.OSTWALD
Disney Theme Parks; Gehry, Frank (United States); Graves, Michael (United States);
Predock, Antoine (United States); Scott Brown, Denise (United States); Stern, Robert
A.M. (United States); Venturi, Robert (United States)

Further Reading
Asensio Cerver, Francisco, New York: Arco, 1997
Dunlop, Beth, New York: Abrams, 1996

Koolhaas, Rem, New York: Oxford University Press, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1978;
2nd edition, New York: Monacelli, 1994
Kyriazi, Gary, Secaucus, New Jersey: Citadel Press, 1976

Marling, Karal Ann (editor), Paris and Montreal: Flammarion, 1997
McCullough, E., © New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1957
Sorkin, Michael (editor), New York: Hill and Wang, 1992

ANDO, TADAO 1941-

Architect, Japan

Tadao Ando, one of the most important contemporary Japanese architects, has pursued
what he calls an architecture that moves people with its poetic and creative power. His
numerous buildings yield intensely meaningful and didactic experiences. In so doing,
Ando has engaged the discipline in the core philosophical questions on humanistic
values, such as the end and purpose of creativity, or what architecture can contribute to
improve the quality of human existence. To study his architecture is to examine how
architecture can conceivably enhance the world as a humanistic discipline.

On the tangible level, Ando’s works may be characterized by their primary walls,
constructed out of limited materials and composed of purely geometric forms. Raw,
unfinished reinforced concrete has been Ando’s material of choice since his earliest
years; later he added a shorter list of wooden buildings. These rather reductive methods,
however, should never be taken to demonstrate a lack of intention, nor do they result in
poor spatial qualities; instead, they are the consequence of Ando’s willful determination
to stage, though intangible they may be, rich architectural experiences. Ando’s simple
materials and forms engage a viewer in an appreciation of architecture, making the piece
significant to that person. Ando is therefore in no respect a formalist—his interest in the
tangible stems solely from his much deeper concern for their ontological relation to the
intangible aspects of architecture.

Ando’s decision to limit his materials and forms comes from the belief that their
intrinsic natures heighten the viewer’s experience of buildings, especially when they
reveal their utmost state of existence. Therefore, Ando compares himself to the poet who

chooses words carefully and gives them the most appropriate forms of expression. Ando
is keenly interested in and highly knowledgeable about building materials. Once, in the
early 1980s, Ando joined other sculptors, industrial designers, and architects in an
exhibition, held in Tokyo, of objects made out of glass. Ando’s entry, nothing but
numerous sheets of glass laid horizontally on top of one another, brought to the viewer’s
attention the intrinsic nature of float glass. Produced by pouring liquid glass on a flat bed,
ordinary float glass inevitably has minute irregularities on the upper-side surface.
Compiling such sheets magnifies the irregularities, eventually causing them to shatter.
Ando’s project celebrated almost perfect sheets that withstood the challenge and quietly
acknowledged the great care the manufacturer took in producing them.

It is also in building projects that Ando reveals the material’s properties to the physical
extreme with a high degree of care. The intention is to present the materials in their
utmost essence. In fact, Ando believes that the more austere his wall, the more it speaks
to mankind. Ando’s specification of hard concrete mixture stirred up the Japanese
building industry in 1970s, when both contractors and architects were used to the norm of
much softer mixes for the sake of its easy distribution into the forms. The specification
demanded Ando’s attentive supervision, apt instruction, and even some on-site
demonstration—he is said to have tapped the wooden panels incessantly while concrete
was being poured. Once constructed, however, the walls were worthy of a critical gaze
and required no finishing materials that would ordinarily hide the faults of construction.

Ando’s efforts to provide an intense architectural experience rest not only with
materials but also with building form and open space. As one becomes familiar with
Ando’s floor plans, one recognizes in them the persistent recurrence of pure geometry.
However, once inside his building, a visitor is confronted with an enriched sequence of
spatial experiences rather than a mere confirmation of simple forms. The ultimate goal is
to draw attention to the space’s architectural qualities. Ando once commented that an
unexpected experience generates a stronger impression and elevates man’s spirit. In such
an experience, geometry is no longer an abstract factor but instead serves to generate the
real human existence.

Ando’s interests in the spatial sequence led him to explore the potential significance of
vertical circulation. A staircase is, in the utilitarian sense, nothing but the means to
traverse between different floor levels. With Ando, ascending and descending become
almost a spiritual opportunity of preparation before entering a place of religion, as in the
Water Temple (1991) on Awaji Island. Or, as in the Oyamazaki Villa Museum (1996) in
Kyoto, ascension is an awakening experience of one’s body while discovering the
daylight reflected delicately on each step’s rounded nose, which in turn draws attention to
the cascading waterfall just outside, which shines similarly under the sun.

The simplicity and purity of form and materials also support what Ando has called the
nature—in particular, light, air, and water—of his architecture. Ando once commented
that architecture should not be loud but rather that it should let nature, in the guise of
sunlight and wind, speak. His concrete wall captures on its surface an ever-changing
pattern of light and shadow. In return, the austere surface of the wall is enlivened, made
rich with character. When his concrete walls, taller than eye level, bound a space, as in
the Vitra Seminar House (1993) in Weilam-Rhein, Germany, the observer’s attention is
naturally drawn to the sky, both visually and spatially. When an opening is made in a
wall at floor level, as in a number of residential buildings, the sight is directed


specifically to the pebbled or grassed ground outside. A vertical sheet of water, as in the
Forest of Tombs Museum (1992) in Kumamoto, or a serene horizontal surface of water,
as in the Church on the Water (1998) in Hokkaido, could be waiting to fill the viewer’s
hearing or vision. In these settings, man is in an immediate confrontation with nature,
with only Ando’s architecture serving as a mediator.

Ando has acknowledged that the way he brings nature into architecture could require
some severe living conditions. For example, in Row House Sumiyoshi (1976) in Osaka,
the residents are faced with every element of weather each time they pass the courtyard
on the way from one room to another. Ando’s rather forceful mediation between man and
nature is not always without criticism. Some critics have commented that it leads to a
spatial impoverishment. On the contrary, however, Ando believes that a close
confrontation with nature is crucial for the enrichment of man’s life, which makes man
keenly aware of the season and which nurtures within man a finer sensitivity. This
insistence on austerity and severity reflects his critical stance against modern society’s
materialistic way of life. In this regard, Ando has taken a critical stance against the
modern ways of living that may be materialistically rich and yet spiritually impoverished.
He has made incessant inquiries as to what enriches an individual’s life in the
contemporary age. He considers it critical to discover through his architectural works
what is essential to human life. Ando believes that abundance does not necessarily enrich
one’s life and instead thinks that an architectural space stripped of all excess and
composed simply from bare necessities is true and convincing because it is appropriate
and satisfying. In this understanding of the human conditions, Ando’s architecture
constitutes a challenge to contemporary civilization.
Just as Ando is suspicious of the materialistic view of life, he is equally doubtful about
what many modern and contemporary architects have taken to be an unquestionable goal:
timeliness of design. Rather, Ando’s is a quest for the essence that allows architecture to
endure the test of time. In the same regard, Ando is in a constant search for the kind of
architectural heritages that have withstood various conditions of both time and place.
Ando’s attitude toward architectural heritage should, however, be distinguished from the
Postmodern regionalism in which traditional forms are replicated by modern, universally
available industrial materials and technology, to which Ando is not at all sympathetic. A
pseudo-authentic application is for him not a pursuit of the material’s intrinsic potential
and therefore not essentially architectural.

Ando’s desire to scrutinize the time-earned architectural heritage and to appropriate it
in his projects makes his practice critically cross-cultural. On the one hand, Ando is not
hesitant to draw both from his native Japanese and from other, especially Western,
traditions. On the other hand, his reference to the heritage is always based on the critical
and creative appropriation that often brings the heritage one step beyond its traditional
boundaries. For example, it is not at all difficult to discern a Vitruvian ideal with four
equilateral triangles in his temporary theater, Kara-za in Tokyo (1988). Ando chose the
dodecagon because of a certain order and perfection that the human mind tends to find in
the number 12. This also referred to the 12-year cycle of the Eastern calendar and the 12
months of the Western year. Then Vitruvius’s recommendation is, for Ando, not
restricted to the West but rather is cross-culturally human. For Ando, the dodecagon is
the most appropriate form to give to the project in which theatrical events represent a
construction of a temporary microcosm.


With Ando’s Church of the Light (1989), a cross becomes more than a Christian
symbol. Instead, a vertical and horizontal linear opening in the otherwise solid concrete
wall is a void at the end of the space. It embodies the sense of time and space beyond
reach, so appropriate for religious contemplation. It encourages a respect for the past, a
commitment to the future, and a trust in the universal applicability and effectiveness of
one’s

Modern Art Museum, Fort Worth, Texas, designed by Tadao Ando
(2002)
© Mary Ann Sullivan

particular religious activity, which in turn is limited by its place and time.

Ando has an extraordinary background as an architect. He did not receive any formal
architectural education, nor did he apprentice in an office. As for career preparation,
Ando often refers to the study tours he made on his own and the books he read, including
Le Corbusier’s oeuvre, during the period between 1962 and 1969, before he opened his
architectural office in Osaka. This specific location was also somewhat out of ordinary,
for many well-known, well-established architects are in Tokyo, by far Japan’s largest
center of economic activity. Because of this and because of the strong regional accent in
his Japanese, Ando had often compared himself to a stray warrier, half mockingly and
half proudly. His is the proof that still, in the economically driven contemporary
societies, architecture can provide a spiritual and even sacred dimension of the human
existence.

Although his early practice was limited primarily to residences and smal! commercial
building in the nearby regions of his office, Ando gradually gained domestic and
international acclaim and extended his practice to cultural and religious institutions. Ando
has received virtually every award there is for an architect, including the Annual Prize
from the Architectural Institute of Japan (1979), the Alvar Aalto Medal from the Finnish


Association of Architects (1985), the Gold Medal of Architecture from the French
Academy of Architecture (1989), the Arnold W.Brunner Memorial Prize from the
American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters (1991), the Carlsberg Architectural
Prize of Denmark (1992), the Asahi Prize (1995), the 18th Pritzker Architecture Prize
(1995), the eighth Premium Imperiale (1996), and the Royal Gold Medal from the Royal
Institute of British Architects (1997). His vigorous influence is manifest in the range of
exhibitions of his work, including the Museum of Modern Art, New York (1991); the
Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris (1993); the Royal Institute of British Architects, London
(1993); the Basilica Palladiana, Vicenza (1995); the Sixth Venice Biennale (1996); the
National Museum of Contemporary Art, Seoul (1998); and the Royal Academy of Arts,
London (1998). His winning competition entries include the Modern Art Museum of Fort
Worth, Texas (1997); the Hyogo Prefectural Museum of Modern Art (1997); and the
Manchester City Centre Piccadilly Gardens Regeneration (1999).

RUMIKO HANDA
Church on the Water, Hokkaido, Japan; Modernism; Postmodernism

Biography

Born in Osaka, Japan, 13 September 1941. Self-taught in architecture, traveled in the
United States, Europe, and Africa 1962— 69. Married Yumiko Kato 1970. Founder and
director, Tadao Ando Architect and Associates, Osaka from 1969. Visiting professor,
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 1987; visiting professor, Columbia University,
New York 1988; visiting professor, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1990;
visiting professor, University of Tokyo 1997. Honorary Fellow, American Institute of
Architects 1991. Alvar Aalto Medal, Finnish Association of Architects, 1985; Gold
Medal, French Academy of Architecture 1989; Carlsberg Architectural Prize of Denmark
1992; Pritzker Prize 1995; Royal Gold Medal, Royal Institute of British Architect 1997.

Selected Works

Row House Sumiyoshi, Osaka, 1976

Water Temple, on Awaji Island, 1991

Forest of Tombs Museum, Kumamoto, 1992

Vitra Seminar House, Weil-am-Rhein, Germany, 1993

Oyamazaki Villa Museum, Kyoto, 1996

Hyogo Prefectural Museum of Modern Art (first prize, competition), 1997

Church on the Water, Hokkaido, 1998

Manchester City Centre Piccadilly Gardens Regeneration (first prize, competition),
1999

Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth (first prize, competition), Texas, 2002

Further Reading

Ando, Tadao, and Richard Pare, London: Phaidon, 1996
Ando, Tadao, George T.Kunihiro, and Peter Eisenman, New York: Rizzoli, 1989
Dal Co, Francesco (editor), London: Phaidon, 1995
Milan: Electa, 1994
Futagawa, Yukio (editor), Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita, 1987
Futagawa, Yukio (editor), | Tokyo: A.D.A-Edita, 1991
Futagawa, Yukio (editor), Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita, 1993
Futagawa, Yukio (editor), | Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1997
Jodidio, Philip, Cologne and New York: Taschen, 1997
Kawamukai, Masato, Tadao Ando, and Mirko Zardini, London: Academy Editions, and New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990

APARTMENT BUILDING

Population growth and the increasing density of cities created a housing crisis in the 20th
century. The apartment building emerged as a solution for housing large numbers of
people in small areas. Although a preexisting type, during the 20th century the
development of the apartment building dramatically reshaped the built environment of
cities and their surrounding suburbs. Apartment buildings developed in locations
convenient to transportation networks and services that encouraged dense residential land
use. The increase in apartment living subsequently inspired continued international
dissemination of the modern apartment building type.

An apartment building contains multiple dwelling units of one or more rooms. Other
basic aspects of the 20th-century apartment building’s program are a bathroom and
kitchen for each unit and the provision of heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and other
systems. As with other commercial building types, efficient use of space is integral to
good apartment building design. Public areas of the apartment building are normally
minimal, with a small lobby and laundry room or, in more luxurious examples, a roof
deck, recreation room, or swimming pool. All apartment buildings share the basic
function of providing shelter for numerous household groups, but the features and
appointments of a building can vary greatly, depending on the socioeconomic level of the
intended residents. Apartment buildings need to balance efficiency with comfort; this
requirement is challenging, especially when building for low-income tenants.

In the early 20th century, most architecturally notable apartment buildings were
intended for upper-class tenants. Living in a full-service apartment building could
provide a luxurious home at much smaller cost than maintaining a single-family house.
Rising land values in many cities made sole ownership prohibitively expensive even for
the relatively well off. Use of Classical Revival and Italian Renaissance Revival
decorative modes was prevalent, as evidenced by the lavish examples built in cities such
as New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, London, Paris, and Vienna. The dominance of


historical styles in apartment building design indicated the fashionable design mode for
most commercial and domestic structures during the early part of the century.

For low- and middle-income tenants, apartment building design was characterized by
tension between aesthetics and economic viability. Tenement house design frequently
sacrificed aesthetic and sanitary concerns to create a profitable investment. By the 1920s,
apartment buildings were integral to the international debate over housing and social
reform. European avantgarde architects used the apartment building type to explore the
potential of modernism and prefabricated structural systems for providing affordable
worker housing. Government sponsorship of housing projects provided important
opportunities for architectural experimentation not available in the commercial real estate
market of the United States despite housing reform efforts. The housing policy of the
Weimar Republic generated pioneering modern apartment buildings for German cities,
such as Breslau, Hamburg, Celle, Berlin, and Frankfurt. Another example is J.J.P.Oud’s
Kiefhoek housing (1925), an International Style garden apartment complex built in
Rotterdam. Both the garden apartment and the high-rise form of the apartment building
were explored by architects throughout the mid-20th century. A key high-rise example in
London is Highpoint I (1933-35), designed by Berthold Lubetkin and Tecton.

These two primary apartment building forms—the mainly urban high-rise and the
suburban garden apartment—became internationally prevalent by the 1930s. High-rise
partment buildings, alone and later in planned groups, capitalized on an economy of
cale. They distributed the rising cost of elevators, ventilation, and other systems-related
pparatus by using modern building materials to create taller structures with more living
nits. Garden apartments were suitable for lower-density development on the urban
eriphery, where land was less expensive. Groups of two- or three-story buildings
ranged on landscaped sites contained units that shared an entrance stairwell. The garden
partment form did not require formal public areas or expensive elevators but was not as
fficient in land use or building materials as a more compact high-rise apartment
uilding. In the post-World War II period, the housing crisis became more acute owing to
ears of postponed building and wartime destruction. European governments again
ponsored the construction of major apartment housing projects. In the United States, the
new Federal Housing Administration and later the Department of Housing and Urban
Development began to fulfill a role similar to that of their European counterparts,
although more limited in scope. International Style modernism, particularly the slab-form
high-rise developed by Le Corbusier, dominated these construction efforts.

The key postwar example is Le Corbusier’s Unité d’Habitation (1947-53) at
Marseilles, France. Unite d’Habitation is a 12-story horizontal slab raised on heavy
tapered A roof deck and an interior commercial “street” seek to create a unified
community, but this quality of self-containment also separates the building from its
neighborhood context. Other large apartment buildings based on this model experience
mixed results when applied in other contexts. Noteworthy examples of apartment
buildings done in a postwar modernist vocabulary include ATBAT housing (1951-56,
Shadrach Woods and J.Bodiansky) in Morocco and Peabody Terraces (1964, José Luis
Sert) in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

we

orp gpd py

Are >


A housing estate being completed in Southwark, London, in 1959
(architect unknown)
© Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORBIS

During the postwar period, large-scale developments, including multiple high-rise
apartment buildings, site planning, and amenities such as shopping and recreational
facilities, became more prevalent. In the United States, federal urban-renewal funding
cleared sizable portions of blighted urban neighborhoods to be replaced by large public
housing projects. These projects reflected the modernist vision of social reform through
environmental determinism. Commercial interests built more luxurious and well-
maintained versions of these high-rises for middle-class and wealthier tenants. These
projects could be successful when integrated into existing community services, but they
failed miserably when they isolated poor residents from economically stable parts of the
urban landscape.

Apartment buildings have been a source of controversy over zoning and land use in
the United States. As a multi-dwelling structure, the apartment building threatens the
American ideal of the single-family house. However, economic reality, even in the
United States and the prosperous nations of Europe, is that apartments fulfill an important
need. The apartment building has transformed the urban and suburban landscape of the
20th-century city and by extension the lived experience of many residents.

LISA DAVIDSON

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Eduoard) (France); Eigen Haard Housing Estate,

Amsterdam; Oud, J.J.P. (Netherlands); Public Housing; Unite d’Habitation,
Marseilles/Cité Radieuse


Further Reading

The most current architectural histories of the apartment building type focus on specific

cities. Sociological literature provides additional information on housing issues connected

with the apartment building.

Abel, Joseph Henry, “The Apartment House,” in by Talbot Hamlin, volume 3, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1952

Cerver, Francisco Asensio, New York: Arco, 1997

Cromley, Elizabeth Collins, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1990

Goode, James M., Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1988

Paul, Samuel, New York: Reinhold, 1967

ARCHIGRAM

Architecture firm, England

Archigram is both a group of British architects and their architectural periodical,
which gave the group its name. Between 1960 and 1972, Archigram published nine
issues of the periodical, staged exhibitions and conferences, and devised a number of
influential architectural projects. Founded by Peter Cook (1936-), the group consisted of
Cook, David Greene (1937-), Mike Webb (1937-), Warren Chalk (1927-88), Dennis
Crompton (1935-), and Ron Herron (1930-94). Their avantgarde architecture rejected
heroic modernism in favor of expendable, variable, and often mobile combinations of
component units plugged into superstructures. Although Archigram gained worldwide
recognition, their Utopian project owed much to the intense architectural debate
fermented by the massive rebuilding projects of postwar Britain. The group drew on
eclectic sources, including R.Buckminster Fuller, the Independent Group, Reyner
Banham, comic books, science fiction, consumer imagery, and contemporary technology,
such as the satellite, the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s mobile
launch towers, and the more modest Airstream trailer.

In late 1960, Cook, Greene, and Webb began meeting in an effort to perpetuate the
vibrant intellectual climate that they had experienced at architecture school. Their
publication both augmented their activities, providing a forum for ideas as well as a
publication venue for student work, and gave the group its name. not only suggested the
immediacy of a telegram or an aerogram (i.e. “archi[tecture]-gram”) and the urgency of
their ideas but also described the broadsheet format of the fledgling publication. The first
issue, published in 1961, featured both Greene’s poetry and a collage composed of
provocative statements that wound around and through images of architectural projects, a
metaphor for the group’s desire to break down traditional barriers between form and
statement. The document proclaimed their response to postwar British architecture: “we
have chosen to by pass the decaying Bauhaus image/which is an insult to functionalism”

in favor of organic forms that “flow,” signaling their enduring interest in the inventive
use of architecture to foster communication.

By 1963 the group had coalesced. That year they produced both andthe exhibition,
staged at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (London). celebrated expendability,
claiming that the change in “user-habits” occasioned by expendable items such as food
packaging should prompt a comparable change in “user-habitats,” an argument for
“throwaway architecture” that would mirror the consumerist lifestyle of the late 20th
century. Inspired by William H. Whyte and Jane Jacobs, examined the urban matrix of
which architecture was but one component. The group claimed that “when it is raining in
Oxford Street, the architecture is no more important than the rain, in fact the weather has
probably more to do with the pulsation of the living city at a moment in time” ( 2 [June
1963]). The installation comprised seven “Gloops,” spaces that defined constituent
elements of the living city, such as Communications, Crowd, and Movement. This “city
stimulator,” a Postmodern pastiche inspired by the Independent Group’s _ exhibition,
installed at the Whitechapel Art Gallery (London) in 1956, urged the spectator toward an
awareness of the vitality and the value of city life. Both and consolidated the group’s
conviction that modernist architecture mistakenly prioritized heroic permanent structures
over the user’s changing needs, thereby failing to respond to contemporary
developments, such as technology, the consumer economy, and modern communications.

With (1964), the group embarked on a series of celebrated projects that revolved
around the notion of individual capsules that clipped onto or plugged into a structural
framework. These capsules were mobile, expendable, and responsive to human desires,
thereby embodying Archigram’s central concerns. Cook’s Entertainments Tower (1963),
an entertainment center proposed for the Montreal Exposition (1967), consisted of a
concrete tower on which hung facilities (such as an auditorium) that could be removed or
replaced after the exposition. Similarly, his Plug-In City, a series of ideas developed
between 1962 and 1966, proposed expendable capsules plugged into the network
structure by means of integrated cranes. In 1964 Herron proposed Walking City, mobile
megastructures that walked across both sea and land on robotic, spiderlike legs.
Subsequent projects deployed these ideas on a smaller and perhaps more attainable scale.
Webb proposed the Cushicle (1966-67), a personalized enclosure that enabled a human
to carry a complete environment in a backpack that inflated when needed, and the
Suitaloon (1968), a space suit that inflated to serve as a minimal house. These projects
enabled the consumer to construct a personalized environment, free of the strictures of
modernist architecture.

not only initiated a series of celebrated projects but also brought the group
worldwide attention. Pages were widely reproduced in magazines, providing the model
for other anti-architecture groups, such as the Italian Archizoom group, and group
members were invited to lecture worldwide. In 1966 they organized the International
Dialogues on Experimental Architecture (IDEA), an exhibition and conference in
Folkestone, Kent, England, which attracted notable speakers. In 1967 the
commissioned Archigram to design a house for the year 1990 and received a structure
that could be adjusted to accommodate various daily activities, which was exhibited at
Harrods in London. Archigram was invited to exhibit at both the 1968 Milan Triennale
and Expo °70 in Osaka, Japan. In 1970 the group was invited by the Ministre d’Etat of
Monaco to participate in a limited competition for a seaside entertainment center in

Monte Carlo. True to the group’s anti-heroic stance, their winning project was an
underground structure that preserved the view of the sea. Because of the difficult
economic climate of the 1970s, the Monte Carlo project was never built.

Archigram’s significant collective activities ended in 1972, although its members
remained active as designers, teachers, and archivists of their own history. Archigram
remained influential: a sequence of exhibitions and publications has celebrated their
work, and their anti-architecture stance figures in any history of 20th-century
architecture. Their legacy proves difficult to quantify not only because the members
contributed to a diffuse international discourse about architecture but also because their
projects seem to presage innumerable contemporary trends, including both high-tech and
sustainable approaches to design. More concrete influence can be seen in the work of
Richard Rogers, Norman Foster, and Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers’s Pompidou
Centre (1976) in Paris. Archigram’s medium has proven as powerful as its message. Its
members’ combination of intricate draftsmanship and collaged elements—including
comic books, advertising imagery, and Day-Glo colors—produced a vivid visual record
that typifies the decade of pop art, Marshall McLuhan, the Beatles’ and Rowan and
Martin’s Similarly, both their anti-authoritarian stance and their focus on the individual
reflect the social concerns of the 1960s. Nostalgia for the decade, as well as the
continuing aptness of Archigram’s inventive architecture, continues to spur interest in the
group, as evidenced by the 1998-99 retrospective exhibition

KRISTIN FEDDERS

Banham, Reyner (United States); Bauhaus; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-

Edouard) (France); Foster, Nor-man (Great Britain); Piano, Renzo (Italy); Pompidou
Cen-ter, Paris; Rogers, Richard (Great Britain)

Further Reading

Although was published in limited editions and circulated primarily through the

international architectural community, both the group and its members have written

extensively for mainstream publications. Moreover, since 1972, Archigram has produced

three volumes that reprint pages and projects from as well as additional projects,

commentary, and bibliography.

Cook, Peter, et al. (editors), London: Studio Vista, 1972; New York: Praeger, 1973; revised
edition, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999

Crompton, Dennis, et al., (bilingual English-German edition), London: Academy Editions,
and Berlin: Ernst, 1994

Crompton, Dennis (editor), | London: Archigram Archives, 1998

ARCHITECTURAL DRAWING

In the 20th century and throughout the history of the discipline, drawing has been the
dominant means of architectural communication and is considered to be the “language”

of architecture. Through drawings, an architect can record new ideas, concepts, and even
visionary projects in addition to projects intended for construction. To facilitate this
communication, a number of drawing conventions have evolved.

Orthographic Projections

The most commonly used projective drawing in 20th-century architectural practice is the
orthographic projection. The primary orthographic projections are plan, section, and
elevation views in which the observer’s line of sight is perpendicular to both the drawing
plane and the surfaces of the building viewed and in which the drawing surface is parallel
to the principal surfaces of the building. The floor plan and building section are both
sections, or cuts. The floor plan, a sectional view looking down after a horizontal plane,
cut through the building with the top section removed, typically shows the location of
major vertical elements and all door and window openings. Building sections are
transverse or cross sections or longitudinal. A transverse section is created by cutting at
right angles to the long axis, and conversely, a longitudinal section is an orthographic
projection made by cutting at right angles to the shorter axis. Elevations are drawings of
the exterior of a building and are labeled north, south, east, or west for the direction from
which you see it (which is also the direction it faces). As no single orthographic
projection can communicate all aspects of a threedimensional object, the drawings must
be considered as a series of related views. The advantage of an orthographic projection is
that the faces of an object parallel to the drawing surface are represented without
distortion or foreshortening, retaining their true size to scale, their shape, and their
proportion.

Pictorial Projections

This type of drawing shows the three dimensions of a building simultaneously. They are
generally divided into parallel and perspective drawings. The most common parallel
drawings are oblique and isometric. Oblique projections can be further subdivided into
plan and elevation oblique projections. The plan oblique, or axonometric, is the most
popular of the parallel (or paraline) drawings. A scale drawing of the plan is tilted at
either a 45-degree angle giving equal views of two perpendicular planes or a 30/60-
degree angle giving emphasis to one plane over the other. All lines parallel to the three
main axes are drawn to scale.

Perspective drawings employ various techniques for representing three-dimensional
objects on a two-dimensional surface in a more realistic manner than paraline drawings.
All points of the object are projected to a picture plane by straight lines converging at an
arbitrary fixed point. In a one-point perspective, a principal face of the object is parallel
to the picture plane. Vertical lines remain vertical, horizontal lines remain horizontal, and
lines perpendicular to the picture plane converge on a vanishing point. In two-point
perspective, vertical lines remain vertical and both sets of horizontal lines converge on
their own vanishing points.


At different points in the 20th century, preferences for various drawing types and
rendering techniques have been inextricably linked with artistic movements. The birth of
the Modern Movement early in the century and the influence of Cubism resulted in the
rejection of architectural perspective drawing in favor of the more analytical and
objective axonometric plan projections, which were considered more appropriate for an
architecture cubic in nature and devoid of ornamentation. In fact, several movements in
the first half of the century were known primarily through the production and circulation
of architectural drawings and not as a result of built works. The break with tradition that
characterized Modernism was also evident in the graphic representation of the movement.
One of the early 20th-century movements that was expressed primarily through
drawings was Futurism. The theoretical focus of Futurism, the Italian architectural
movement founded in 1909 by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti (1876-1944), was made
manifest through graphic representations of industrial buildings, skyscrapers, and
Utopian visions of the city of the future. These images glorified technology, machines,
speed, dynamism, and movement. The fact that drawings of futuristic cities by architects
such as Antonio Sant’Elia (1888-1916) do not include plans underscores the notion that
they were never intended for construction.

Architects of the De Stijl movement (1917-28) relied heavily on the use of
axonometric projections to illustrate the development of spaces. The antihistorical
movement advocated a clarity of expression through the use of straight lines,
decomposed cubes, pure planes, right angles, and primary colors. These qualities were
effectively represented in the orthographic projections, which were repeatedly published
and exhibited.

Similarly, Russian avant-garde architecture of the revolutionary era (1917-34) is
known principally through drawings of work that, in many cases, was neither structurally
viable nor ever intended for construction. The new relationship between architecture and
the plastic arts that was central to De Stijl was also prevalent in the Russian architectural
drawings. The formal language of the architecture followed explorations in the fine arts.
Visionary drawings by Iakov Chernikov (1889-1951) celebrated technology and
demonstrated the possibilities of constructivist design to contemporary and subsequent
generations of architects.

The Expressionist movement, affected by unstable conditions in Germany after the
First World War, is characterized by drawings that emphasize force and massiveness.
Buildings were conceived in terms of volume, and drawings by Erich Mendelsohn
(1887-1953) and others were devoid of the detail found in earlier architectural
representation.

In 1975 an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York of drawings from
the archives of the Ecole des BeauxArts exposed a new generation of architects and
designers to the meticulous watercolor renderings that had been supplanted earlier in the
century by axonometric projections. The contemporary Postmodern once again used
historical forms as a source of design inspiration and the movement was characterized by
a resurgence in the Beaux- Arts style of rendering and the architectural drawing, as
became important in its own right removed from the context of built work.

With the advent of Deconstruction late in the 20th century, the language of technology
was concerned with breaking, splintering, diagonal overlapping, and superimposition of


elements, and again, as in previous periods, these formal aspects of the architecture were
reflected in the drawings of architects such as Bernard Tschumi (1944-).

Undoubtedly, the method of graphic representation that will have the greatest
influence on the future generation of architects is that involving the use of the computer.
Computer-aided design, three-dimensional modeling, and programs allowing a client to
“walk through” a space that does not yet exist in reality are revolutionizing the way in
which architects conceive of and represent space. Computers have transformed the design
process into one of continuous and nearly limitless experimentation.

LINDA HART
Further Reading
Ching, Francis, | New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1985
Fraser, Iain, and Rod Henmi, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1994
Gebhard, David, and Deborah Nevins, New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1977
Nevins, Deborah, and Robert Stern, New York: Pantheon Press, 1979

Powell, Helen, and David Leatherbarrow (editors), New York: Abbeville Press, 1982
Robbins, Edward, | Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1997
Stamp, Gavin, London: Trefoil Books, 1982

ARCHITECTURAL PHOTOGRAPHY

At the turn of the 20th century, architectural photography was just emerging as a subfield
of photography and ever since has affected the practice of architecture and its
representation. Governments and organizations made accurate photographic records of
historic buildings, whereas architects found the photograph to be the perfect medium for
sharing their exotic travels with colleagues. Today architectural photography is its own
industry, an inseparable part of the architectural profession and the primary vehicle
through which the public receives information about the built world.

The century began with a type of architectural photography very different from the
precision-obsessed documentary style of the 1870s and 1880s. These new photographs
gave viewers much less detail about the architecture, instead preferring to elicit an
emotive response about the atmosphere of a place. The work of the “Photo-Secession,” a
group led by Alfred Stieglitz (1864-1946), characterizes this approach.

As a result of this expanding definition of photography, new equipment, such as
lighter, faster lenses and smaller, handheld cameras, started to appear. Travel
photographs by Le Corbusier illustrate the spontaneous aesthetic of easier-to-use
equipment. Similarly, the snapshots by architect Erich Mendelsohn and others, compiled
in a publication titled (1925, rev. 1928), were taken from nontraditional angles, featured
people, and considered a wide range of vernacular subjects in an attempt to describe the
architect’s physical and conceptual impressions of the United States.

It was in the late 1930s that the history of architectural photography made a dramatic
shift. Until this time, although many photographers excelled at making images of
architecture, no one had yet dedicated their entire career to this task. Like Margaret
Bourke-White (1904-71), whose powerful 1936 photograph titled “Fort Peck Dam,
Montana” appeared on the first cover of magazine, some photographers worked as
journalists for a variety of publications. Others, such as Berenice Abbott (1898-1991),
who spent years photographing New York for the Federal Art Project, eventually moved
on to other subjects. Toward the end of the decade, however, there appeared professional
architectural photographers whose only business was to make photographs of buildings,
primarily for use in publications and by architects as marketing tools.

Magazines and journals produced internationally in major cities were quick to include
architectural photographs with their articles. These mass-produced images circulated
widely in magazines such as and to name only two, and kept clients and the
profession informed of new trends, emerging architects, award-winning designs, and
buildings that were important at local, regional, national, and international levels. With
the emergence of architectural history as an academic discipline in the 19th and 20th
centuries, the important history texts illustrated the canonic works of architecture with
photographs that in some cases would become iconic representations of famous
buildings.

It is not coincidental that the International Style gained popularity and influence at the
same time that a few talented photographers started to specialize in architectural images.
Among the many factors that contributed to this, two are particularly noteworthy. The
first is that, generally speaking, the representation of modern architecture was inherently
well suited to the formal language of modernism. Photography seemed well suited to
showing either layered planes or the subtle lights and darks of curved surfaces. Because
color had not yet become the standard, black-and-white photography’s emphasis on tone
and depth worked well with modern architecture’s use of translucent materials and
interest in space. Moreover, photography’s ability to isolate a single viewpoint provided
endless possibilities for abstract compositions. Some historians argue that the widespread
acceptance of black-and-white photography in the early days of the International Style
encouraged and perpetuated the movement’s monochromatic aesthetic. Photography
surely served to distribute the movement’s imagery and ideals to an international
audience.

A second factor appearing simultaneously with modernism and_ professional
architectural photography was the rising status of commercialism in society. Editors and
advertisers hungered for images of modern life, giving rise, particularly after World War
IL, to an immense market for architectural photographs that could be serviced only by a
new group of specialized photographers. In the United States, this was particularly true of
photographs of the “American dream home,” which were in high demand and resembled
fashion photographs in style and attitude. The potential for images to become marketing
tools for architecture as a whole was recognized by Walter Gropius, Frank Lloyd Wright,
and others, who immediately used architectural photography to promote their ideas.

Several figures of the architectural photography community emerged in the late 1930s
and early 1940s, including Ezra Stoller (1915-) and Julius Shulman (1910). The first
well-known architectural photography firm, Hedrich-Blessing, also came about during
this period. Begun in Chicago by Ken Hedrich (1908-72), Hedrich-Blessing has been


known for dramatic composition, a high level of craftsmanship, and an understanding of
architects’ need for marketable images.

The introduction of color photography in the 1960s and 1970s presented challenges
and opportunities that earlier photographers had not encountered. In addition to an
image’s formal composition and the craftsmanship of the final product, photographers
now had to consider the color of every element that fell within the photograph’s
boundaries. This was made more complicated by the nature of color film, which is slower
than black-and-white film and sensitive to differences between daylight, incandescent,
and other types of light. Despite the technical difficulties, color photography became very
popular among architects and publications because it provided a new, important layer of
information. Two photographs by Richard Bryant (1947-) illustrate how color
photography has been used effectively. In his 1983 photograph of the Camden Town TV-
am Building, the slower film speed records an object emitting light passing across the
bottom-left corner of the frame as a zigzag line of light that becomes the photograph’s
only suggestion of life or movement. More recent photographers, such as Norman
McGrath (1931-), Tim Street-Porter (1939-), Timothy Hursley (1955-), Cervin Robinson
(1928-), and Yukio Futagawa (1932-), have spent much of their careers in the age of
color photography.

Today, architectural photography, particularly in color, has also become the dominant
mode of architectural representation in publications. This is because it is perceived as
more accurate and immediate than sketches or renderings. However, with the increasing
number of photographers and the rising importance of the photograph to the business of
architecture, the inability of photography to represent reality has become a significant
issue. Most agree that architecture is unique among the arts because it uses the passage of
time and all the audience’s senses in combination to create an unreproducible, three-
dimensional experience. Photography, on the other hand, isolates a single moment and
view in two dimensions, often giving the viewer an inaccurate idea of how a building
looks or what it is like inside. Still, photographers have been able to create many
wellknown and highly published photographs by making educated decisions about
distortions and working closely with architects and publishers to create photographs by
understanding the medium’s limitations and creatively using its distortions to
communicate ideas about buildings.

SARAH M.DRELLER

Further Reading

Given photography’s importance to the architectural profession, surprisingly little has
been written on its history. The only survey of the entire history of architectural
photography is Robinson and Herschman, now slightly outdated. Several photographers
have published books on their careers, including Stoller and Shulman, whereas Busch
offers short profiles and a series of photographs for Stoller, Shulman, and ten other
important architectural photographers. Perspectives on architectural photography and
modernism can be found in Benson and Naegele. For basic information on the history of
photography in general, the two standard texts are Newhall and Rosenblum.

Benson, Robert, “The Image and The Reality,” 35, no. 2 (March/April 1991)

Busch, Akiko, New York and Wokingham, Berkshire: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1987

Museum of Modern Art, with introduction by Beaumont Newhall, New York: Museum of
Modern Art, 1937; as by Newhall, New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1937;
revised and enlarged edition, London: Seeker and Warburg, 1972; 5th edition, 1994

Naegele, Daniel (editor), 22, no. 2 (Summer 1998)

Robinson, Cervin, and Joel Herschman, New York: Architectural League of New York,
1986

Rosenblum, Naomi, New York: Abbeville Press, 1984; revised edition, New York, 1989; 3rd
edition, New York, 1997

Saunders, William S., New York: Abrams, 1990

Shulman, Julius, edited by Peter Géssel, Cologne, Germany, New York, and London: Taschen,
1998

ARCOSANTI, ARIZONA

Arcosanti, found in the desert of Arizona, is a prototype urban development by the
visionary architect and planner Paolo Soleri. The site is an experimental “urban
laboratory” where Soleri applies his ideas concerning architecture, ecology, and urban
planning. Born on 21 June 1919 in Turin, Italy, Soleri, shortly after completing Ph.D.
studies in architecture at the Turin Politecnico in 1946, joined Frank Lloyd Wright at
Taliesin in Spring Green, Wisconsin, and at Taliesin West in Scottsdale, Arizona, with a
fellowship for 16 months. He immigrated to the United States in 1955 and by 1970 had
completed designs for some 30 “arcologies.”

Soleri uses the term “arcology’ for alternative urban habitats (architecture and
ecology). Arcologies are high-density structures that will be capable of containing close
to six million inhabitants. Arcosanti is the 13th of these arcologies, and it was the most
feasible to build. It is a laboratory for a community that conserves energy, land, and raw
materials and is composed of studios, apartments, a swimming pool, a restaurant, cultural
facilities, a casting workshop, a community farm, a sewage pond, and greenhouses.

Soleri, beginning construction at Arcosanti in 1970, has increased the initial projection
of 1,500 inhabitants to 5,000. It is built on the south slope of a canyon on an 860-acre site
at Cordes Junction. Arcosanti lies approximately 65 miles north of Scottsdale, where in
1956 Soleri had begun constructing Cosanti, a nonprofit educational foundation.

Cosanti was built on five acres of land, and it is where Soleri began his experiments in
concrete-casting techniques that were later to be applied at a larger scale at Arcosanti.
Experiments have also been carried out on surface decorations and moldings at Arcosanti
as well as the construction of large vaults and solar apses. Silt from streambeds on the
site was used to create forms for sections of vaults, cast-in-place vaulting, and the precast
wall panels. Silt is used as a parting agent and can be easily carved to produce ribs where
needed. Coloring matter then is applied over the silt and adheres to the concrete along
with some of the silt to create various shades of color and texture. Linoleum sheets are
used for large areas when silt carving is inefficient. They are cut to predetermined shapes
and used to create indentations and transfer color to the concrete. The use of ordinary
wood formwork is used for the pouring of foundations, columns, beams, and slabs. There


are a few floor slabs where silt is used on top of the formwork to create curved, ribbed
undersides.

Soleri has designed advanced solar systems in building structures with assistance from
the University of Arizona. At Cosanti, Soleri also began creating his ceramic wind-bells.
This effort eventually led to the creation of a foundry and workshop on its site for casting
metal bells. The Soleri bells soon became the main income source for Cosanti and, later,
Arcosanti.

There are more than 50,000 annual visitors to Arcosanti who may participate in
workshops and conferences or tour the grounds. The main builders of Arcosanti have
been mainly volunteers, summer student apprentices, and a few employed workers.

The urban planning at Arcosanti takes its stand against suburban sprawl, which Soleri
sees as an extremely destructive force. As an alternative to spread-out cities and suburban
sprawl, Arcosanti is based on a miniaturization of elements into large urban structures.
To Soleri, energy problems are largely the result of suburban sprawl and the use of the
automobile. It is avoiding the use of automobiles and creating a series of ministructures,
not megastructures, that Soleri believes will help create a better prototype for urban
dwelling.

It is Soleri’s notion that cities are vital but that contemporary cities tend to isolate
people from one another and to have transportation systems that are cumbersome and
polluting. Cities also tend to segregate people on the basis of age, race, ethnicity,
occupation, and wealth as well as to create problems such as natural resource depletion,
food scarcity, and a depletion of the quality of life. Arcosanti is designed to include the
positive attributes of an urban environment, such as human interaction, and availability of
consumer goods and services along with integrating these urban qualities in an interaction
with the surrounding desert. When completed, Arcosanti will be 25 stories high. With a
footprint that covers 15 acres of the 860-acre site, it will represent one of the highest
population densities ever known.

The architectural historian Hanno-Walter Kruft claims in (1994) that Arcosanti
explores an alternative to the functionalist and technologist concerns within architecture
occurring in the United States at the time of its inception. According to Kruft, Arcosanti
is a “transtechnological” Utopian city in which Soleri believes that by improving social
conditions, humankind’s genetic structure would also be improved (p. 439). Like many
modernists, Soleri believes in the morality of architecture: better living conditions
produce better humans. However, following the philosopher Teilhard de Chardin, Soleri
extends this to include humankind’s genetic composition as being effected by better
living conditions. The architectural historian Charles Jencks, in (1982), stated that in
the early 1970s, Soleri’s Arcosanti presented a “highly saturated superurbanism” that
differed from many counter-cultural movements of the time that emphasized a movement
away from the urban environment (p. 284). Jencks also described Soleri as a late
modernist having similarity with Luis Barragan and John Hejduk in his emphasis on pure
sculptural form (p. 178).

Soleri insists that Arcosanti is not a megastructure. However, it is a structure after the
architectural tradition of Archigram

Crafts III Building at Arcosanti, Cordes Junction, Arizona (1977)
© G.E.Kidder Smith/CORBIS

and Buckminster Fuller. Soleri is similar to Fuller, who discussed the environment and
ecological issues beyond conventional ideas of architecture. However, unlike Fuller’s
tendency to emphasize self-sufficiency and applied technology, Soleri’s ideas on
technology are based on analogies and the belief that a person is never self-sufficient.
Arcosanti today has approximately 100 occupants who still aid Soleri in its
continuation. Its slow growth has been largely caused by lack of funding, but it remains
an experimental city and an alternative to suburban sprawl in the United States.
REBECCA DALVESCO

Further Reading

Arcidi, Philip, “Paolo Soleri’s Arcology: Updating the Prognosis-Interview,” | (March 1991)

Bazan Giordano, Michele “Il Mondo de Soleri=The World of Soleri,” (April 1990)

Cook, Jeffrey “Architettura e biosfera=Architecture and Biosphere-(Interview),” (September
1999)

Dixon, J.M., “Arcosanti, Arizona: Job Site for Utopia,” — (April 1973)

Gavinelli, Corrado, “Arcosanti 2000 di Paolo Soleri,” (December 1993)

Jencks, Charles, London: Academy Editions, 1988

Jensen, Robert, “Arcosanti as a Practical Place,” (Winter 1983)

Kostof, Spiro, “Soleri’s Arcology: A New Design for the City,” (March-April 1971)

Moholy-Nagy, Sybil, “Arcology of Paolo Soleri,” (May 1970)

Plagen, Peter, “Journal: A Visit to Soleri’s El Dorado,” (May-June 1979)

Sharp, Dennis, “Paolo Soleri,’ (November 1972)

Shipsky, James, “Diary of an Arcosanti Experience: What It’s Like to Be a Soleri ‘Workshopper’,”

(May 1982)
Skolimowski, Henryk, “Paolo Soleri: The Philosophy of Urban Life,” (Winter 1971)


Spinelli, Luigi, “Soleri e l’ Arizona=Soleri’s Arizona,” (February 1999)
Stanishev, Georgi, “Soleri’s Laboratory-Interview,” (January 1993)
Zevi, Luca, “La Ricerca di Paolo Soleri=Paolo Soleri’s Research,” (December 1990)

ARDALAN, NADER 1939-

Architect, Iran and United States

On his return to his native Iran from the United States in 1964, Nader Ardalan
influenced contemporary architecture in the country through his modernist designs and
his concern with Islamic and regional expressions. These concerns have remained with
him throughout his career and are reflected clearly in his work. Ardalan has been
influential not only in his native country but also in the Middle East as an architect, urban
planner, and theoretician.

Ardalan is a designer influenced by the internationalist agendas of the 1960s, although
his interests are wide ranging. He was also among those who formulated the “Habitat Bill
of Rights” presented to the United Nations Habitat Conference in Vancouver in 1971,
where issues of inequity between East and West and those related to culture were
considered. His architectural and planning work reflects particular attention to cultural
and ecological considerations. In Iran, this was made evident through his understanding
of the traditions and forms of the vernacular and of Iranian (Shiite) Islam, although
manifested in a totally contemporary idiom.

His best-known work in Iran is the Center for Management Studies (1972, Tehran),
now the University of Imam Sadegh in Tehran, which consists of vaulted buildings
arranged formally around courtyards. The geometric forms and axial arrangements and
the reinterpretation of the Persian “paradise garden” are revealed in the low concrete
structures that sit comfortably in a landscape of gardens and fruit orchards. His Tehran
Center for the Celebration of Music (1978) continues this exploration, with an effective
use of water and natural light. Other innovative works in the country include the Behshar
Home Offices (1974), now used as the Ministry of Industry, and Bu Ali Sina University
(1978, with Georges Candilis) in Hamadan. He planned several new towns, such as
Nuran (1978) near Isfahan, which was designed with the paradise garden as its central
spine and having two symbolic heads or ends signifying the imaginative or spiritual and
the thinking or material.

Ardalan coauthored a book with Lela Bakhtiar, that in the last quarter of the
20th century has influenced many architects and scholars interested in contemporary
“Islamic architecture.” In this book, the authors explore both the spiritual and the
geometric aspects of Islamic architecture, presenting the metaphysical doctrines and
symbolism within natural, geometric, and harmonic orders. Subsequently, Ardalan wrote
a number of articles that built on these themes, and his preoccupation with what he calls
“transcendent design” continued. The Sea Palace Paradise Garden (1994-97), a residence
on the Persian Gulf coast of Abu Dhabi, uses the or octagonal “eight paradise,” concept
and a mandala plan set in long axial gardens and courtyards.


Ardalan moved to the United States two years before the Islamic Revolution of 1979,
first continuing his practice in

ee

Al-Sharq Waterfront, view of piazza, Kuwait City, designed by Nader
Ardalan (1998)
Photo courtesy Nader Ardalan © Aga Khan Award for Architecture

Boston and then working there for Jung-Brannen International. His international work
included the Preservation Plan (1984) for the Old City of Jerusalem and the Ankara
Sheraton Hotel (1984). In the United States, his work became more concerned with
corporate image making and new technologies, a departure from his earlier concerns. His
prize-winning competition entry for the Citizens Plaza Office (1989), a triangular-shaped
building with a tall entry atrium, is set against the background of a historic area in
Providence, Rhode Island. This manifestation of the atrium as an organizing and
monumental element is used subsequently in other projects, as in the 23-story, 54,000-
squaremeter ADMA-OPCO and ADGAS Office Building (1994-96) in Abu Dhabi. By
and large, in his later work the spiritual dimension of architecture has given way to more
formal and economic factors in his corporate and commercial buildings.

Perhaps Ardalan was never truly satisfied working in the United States, for when the
opportunity arose to move to Kuwait to work on major projects there, he did so. In 1994
he joined the Kuwait Engineers Office as its principal designer. His subsequent work all
over the Middle East has focused on the theme of modernity and the integration of
tradition interpreted through historic Islamic architecture and the desert vernacular of the
region. This has led to a contemporary historicism, a kind of synthesis, akin to
Postmodernism found in the West. A good example of this is the buildings along a 2.4-
kilometer-long waterside development in Kuwait City. The project consists of a seafront
esplanade with low-rise buildings and a large retail complex, the Al Sharq completed in
1998. The complex with its plazas overlooks the sea and marina on one side and the city
on the other and is conceived as a connector to the urban fabric. The design itself uses


traditional elements, such as wind towers, shaded arcades, and (wood screens), although
much of the building is mechanically air conditioned and consists of large shopping-mall
types of spaces that have been imported from contemporary commercial practices,
including the idea of anchor stores on either end of the so-called It is also noteworthy
that at the ground-floor level, in “places one can touch,” the materials used evoke
tradition—ceramic tiles, stone bases, and pilasters—whereas the upper levels are finished
in gypsumreinforced concrete. The large interior spaces are finished in marble and other
rich materials. Overall, the effect is a cross between a modern shopping mall and a
traditional (the covered bazaar).

The struggle to reconcile his notions about culture and spirit with those of having to
work in a competitive marketplace places Ardalan in a curious position. His current
architectural projects carry within them the imagery of the past; this is also prevalent
among many architects practicing in the region. This sense of fusion is embodied in his
current work, but what distinguishes Ardalan’s work is his consistent fine sense of design
and place making.

HASAN-UDDIN KHAN
Tran

Biography

Born in Tehran, Iran, 9 March 1939. Attended the Carnegie Institute of Technology,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 1956-61; bachelor of arts degree 1961; studied at the Harvard
University Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts; master’s degree in
architecture 1962. Married (1) Laleh Bakhtiar (divorced 1976); married (2) Shahla Ganji
1977:4 children. Worked for several firms in the United States including Skidmore,
Owings and Merrill, San Francisco, California 1962-64; head of the architecture and
engineering section, the National Iranian Oil Company, Masjid-i-Sulaiman, Iran 1964—
66; design partner, Abdul Aziz Farman-Farmaian and Associates, Tehran 1966-72.
Founder and managing director, the Mandala Collaborative, Tehran 1972-79; president,
Mandala International, Boston, Massachusetts 1977-91; principal and senior vice
president, Jung/Brannen International Limited, Boston from 1983. Visiting critic in
architecture, University of Tehran 1969-73; visiting critic in architecture, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut 1977; visiting critic in architecture, Harvard
University Graduate School of Design 1977-78; visiting critic in architecture,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 1979-80; visiting critic in urban
design, Harvard University Graduate School of Design 1977-78 and 1981-83. Member,
steering committee, Aga Khan Awards for Architecture 1976-80; member, Designing for
Islamic Cultures Workshop, Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1980; jury member, King Fahd Award in Architecture 1987; member, long-
range planning committee, Senate of Massachusetts 1989; member, advisory board,
WGBH Educational Foundation, Boston 1990-93; chairman Harvard University
Graduate School of Design, New England Alumni 1990-93; jury member, State
Landmark of Kuwait Competition 1993.

Selected Works

For Skidmore, Owings and Merrill:
Engineering Sciences Building, University of California at Berkeley, 1964
For the National Iranian Oil Companies (NIOC):
Dr. Eghbal Elementary School, Masjid-i-Sulaiman, Iran, 1964
Staff Housing, NIOC, Kharg Island, Iran, 1966
For Farman-Farmaian & Associates:
Asian Games Sports Center, Tehran, 1972
Iran Center for Management Studies, Tehran, 1972
Behshar Home Offices, Tehran, 1974
As the Mandala Collaborative:
Bank of Iran and Holland, Tehran (with Georges Candilis), 1977
Bu Ali Sina University Master Plan and University Sports Center, Hamadan, Iran,
1978
Development Plan and Housing, Nuran Satellite Town, Isfahan, Iran, 1978
Tehran Center for the Celebration of Music, Tehran, 1978
“Jerusalem Consciousness,” Old City Promotion Plan, Jerusalem, 1984
With Jung/Brannen Associates:
Hartford Insurance Building, San Francisco, 1984
Ankara Sheraton Hotel and Retail Center, 1984
Treatment Facilities Plan, Boston, 1989
One Citizens Plaza, Providence, 1989
The Sultan Center, Kuwait, 1994
Abu Dhabi Marine Operating Company (ADMA-OPCO) and ADGAS Headquarters,
Abu Dhabi, 1996
With Kuwait Engineers Office:
Al Bustan Center and Shopping Galleria, Kuwait, 1994
Sea Palace Paradise Garden, Abu Dhabi, 1997
Al Sharq Souk and Waterfront Project, Kuwait (with Sasaki Associates), 1998
Grand Hotel Redevelopment Master Plan, Abu Dhabi (project completion targeted for
2001)
Shaqab Equestrian Club, Doha, Qatar, 1999

Selected Publication

(with Laleh Bakhtiar), 1973

Further Reading
Ardalan, Nader, “On Mosque Architecture,” in edited by Renata Holod and Darl Rastorfer,
Millerton, New York: Aperture, 1983
Ardalan, Nader, “Innovation and Tradition: New Design’s Relevance to Cultural Heritage,” 23

(1997)
Ardalan, Nader, “The Paradise Garden Paradigm,” in Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1998

Badshah, Akhtar, “The Fusion of Nature and Culture in Design,” 40 (September 1991)

Eshraq, M., “Contemporary Iranian Architects,” | (June/November 1973)

Kassarjian, J.B., and N.Ardalan, “The Iran Center for Management Studies, Tehran,” in
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Aga Khan Program for Islamic Architecture, 1982

“Kuwait City Waterfront Souk by Nader Ardalan (KEO),” (Spring 1999)

Pontoizeau, Yvette, “Architectures iraniennes,” (February 1978)

ARGENTINA

In the late 19th century, a powerful group of politicians and intellectuals known as “The
Generation of the Eighties” incorporated Argentina into a world economy dominated by
the British Empire. The early decades of the 20th century witnessed the transformation of
the social and economic foundations of the country. Administrative and educational
reforms were implemented during the modernization process. Immigration and the
movement of the rural population to the city generated the rapid growth of metropolitan
areas. Concurrently, an ideological break with the Spanish colonial past generated a
cultural identification with the ideas of the French Enlightenment. As a result of a
widespread cultural debate between what was understood as civilization and progress
versus barbarism and savages, the larger cities of the country, particularly Buenos Aires,
were transformed by boulevards, parks, avenues, and building following the Beaux-Arts
tradition.
In Argentina, modernization was implemented by conservative political powers. The
ruling class was confronted with the dilemma of how to incorporate new ideas and how
to deal with an unprecedented situation of quick institutional change and demographic
diversity and growth. This situation generated a reaction in some sectors of society for
the need to preserve the Hispanic past. Consequently, in the first two decades of the 20th
century, parallel to an architectural production dominated by French-educated architects
such as Alejandro Christophersen, the first attempts to generate a national style were
developed.
Martin Noel adopted a neo-Colonial style in his own residence, today the Museum
Fernandez Blanco of Iberoamerican Art (1924). The neo-Colonial style also produced the
Cervantes Theater (1922) by Aranda and Repetto and the Bank of Boston (1924) by Paul
Bell Chambers and Louis Newbery Thomas with a facade inspired by the Spanish
renaissance. The search for authentic cultural roots and a national style was the first
attempt to examine architectural patrimony and to systematically preserve local culture.
The first part of the 20th century was also characterized by other reactions against
Beaux-Arts and academic canons. Art Nouveau appeared through varied manifestations
including Catalan modernism in Rosario by Francisco Roca Simo and in Buenos Aires by
Julian Garcia Nufiez with the notable Spanish Hospital (1906). Other architects who
embraced Italian influences include Mario Palanti, Francisco Gianotti, and Virgilio
Colombo.

The 1925 International Exhibition of Decorative Arts in Paris signaled a shift in taste
identified with new materials and architectural types, such as cinemas, bars, banks, and


hotels. In Buenos Aires, Alejandro Virasoro’s House of Theater (1927), Santander Bank
(1929), and the Equitativa del Plata office building (1929) are key examples of this
tendency. Also important is the Opera Cinema (1936) by Alberto Bourdon.

The transition between Art Deco and Argentinian rationalism is exemplified in
Rosario, with La Comercial de Rosario (1939), a building for offices, a theater, and
apartments by De Lorenzi, Otaola, and Rocca, and the Company of Industry and
Commerce Headquarters (1939) by Arman and Todeschini.

When the military regime of Uriburu took power in 1930, conservative and
authoritarian tendencies desired to build a national identity strong enough to overcome
the diverse mosaic of traditions brought by immigration. Parallel to these efforts, the
transformation of urban culture and new minimum standards of living marked the
transition from the dominance of academic and historicist styles to rational architecture.
Rationalism hence in the 1930s acquired a progressive connotation and increasingly
became a formal modernist alternative adopted even by architects with a traditional
academic education.

Exemplary works in this period in Buenos Aires include the Comega Building (1932)
by Enrique Douillet and Alfredo Joselevich, the Safico (1934) by Walter Moll, and the
Kavanah building (1936) by Sanchez, Lagos, and de la Torre. Broadly considered a
masterpiece of the period, the Kavanah’s refined Art Deco interiors were influenced by
Chicago’s skyscrapers but remained attentive to local characteristics, adaptation to the
site, and innovative technology. Another modernist landmark is the Cinema Rex (1937)
by Alberto Prebish.

In Cérdoba, representative of the period is the Sudamerica Building (1938) by Jaime
Roca and Vilar, Sarmiento School (1940) by Juarez Caceres, and the Allende House
(1936) by Roca.

Argentina also manifests some of the earliest critiques of modernist stylization. The
Austral Group, in its manifesto (1939), declared that “present architecture is in a
critical moment and lacking the spirit of the initiators.” The group denounced the use of
academicism and so-called narrow-minded functionalism. The Austral Group was
composed of Bonet, Ferrari Hardoy, Kurchan, Le Pera, Ungar, and Zalba. Representative
of the manifesto’s position are the ateliers and housing for artists (1939) in Buenos Aires
by Bonet, Lopez Chas, and Vera Ramos, characterized by the use of Mediterranean
vaults, rich materials, and tectonic variations.

In the 1940s, Peron initiated a plan of industrial production for Argentina. World War
II promoted the industrial development of the country, and architecture became oriented
toward social welfare. Public work was directed to the areas of education, housing, and
health. It was only after World War II that International Style modernism gained
dominance. Between 1942 and 1944, the Austral Group published three influential issues
of the magazine pursuing a modernism connected to landscape, climate, and regional
construction materials. An important work of this decade was the Apartment (1942) in
Virrey Del Pino, Belgrano, by Kurchan and Ferrari Hardoy, in which the architects
incorporated a growing tree into the facade.

At the same time, Amancio Williams, with a rigorous and purist aesthetic, created two
masterpieces: the House Over the Brook (1945) in Mar del Plata and studies for a
Suspended Office Building Project (1946). In the late 1940s, the influential organic group
Metron, composed of Tedeschi, Sacriste, Vivanco, Caminos, and Borgato, was created in

Tucuman. Critical of the International Style for its negation of the past and regional
architecture, Metron’s ideas were promulgated by Eduardo Sacriste’s site- and landscape-
based works, including Barrio Jardin Elementary School (1947) and the Gémez Omil
House (1951).

The most representative work of this period is the project, in 1953, for the General San
Martin Theater (1960) in Buenos Aires by Mario Roberto Alvarez and Ruiz.

In the 1950s and early 1960s, institutional works were inspired by Le Corbusier’s
Unite d’Habitation apartment complex in Marseilles (1952). Le Corbusier’s curtain wall,
free plan, and sculptural terraces are the dominant features of the Encotel Post Office
and Auditorium (1955) in Buenos Aires by Jose Spencer and the Municipal Building
(1954) in Cordoba by the group SEPRA: Sanchez Elia, Peralta Ramos, and Agostino. The
Civic Center of La Pampa (1956) by Testa, Davinovic, Gaido, and Rossi shows the
influence of Le Corbusier’s Parliament building in Chandigarh, India.

As an alternative to the International Style, the Church of Our Lady of Fatima (1957)
in Martinez (state of Buenos Aires) by Caveri and Ellis reinterpreted regional typologies
and materials.

One of the most important studios of the 1960s and 1970s is Mario Roberto Alvarez
and Associates. Representatives of the professionalism of the group are the Cultural
Center Buenos Aires City (1970) and SOMISA (1975), the headquarters for the steel
company owned by the state. Two seminal pieces of the 1960s are the project for the
National Library (project, 1961; construction, 1972-92) by Clorindo Testa and the
sculptural Bank of London (1966) by Testa, Sanchez Elia, Peralta Ramos, and Agostini.
This bank is considered a masterpiece of Brutalist architecture.

Since the 1960s, the application of new technology and processes of construction
characterized proposals such as the Hospital (1963) in Oran, Salta, by Llauré-Urgell and
Associates. This hospital creates a microclimate within a basic module, allowing for
expansion and, eventually, change of functions.

The 1970s were characterized by a series of relevant competitions, including the
project for the Auditorium of Buenos Aires City (1972), a complex of organic fragments,
by Baudizzone, Erbin, Lestard, Varas, Diaz. Moreover, the Civic Center (1971) for San
Juan by Antonini, Schon, Zemborain and Associates explored flexibility and modules. In
addition, several competitions for skyscrapers were held in Catalinas Norte in Buenos
Aires. The most interesting response is the Conurban building (1973) by Kocourek SRL.
The facade of the building is adapted to the climate and the orientations. The building for
ATC (Argentinean Color TV) by Manteola, Sanchez Gomez, Santos, Solsona, and
Vifioly is considered the most relevant example of the late 1970s for its integration with
the context and the resolution of complex functional requirements.

In the wake of the military government years, the 1980s were characterized by diverse
tendencies, ranging from the search for a rediscovery of Latin American connections to
the revalorization of the urban heritage to architecture as aesthetic experience only.
However, the enriching possibilities opened by a Postmodern condition also brought
frivolity and superficiality. José Ignacio Diaz contributed since the 1970s to transform
and enrich the urban character of Cérdoba, the second-largest city in the country. Using
the characteristic brick construction material of the city, Diaz designed and built more
than 120 residential buildings. In the public sector, Miguel Roca’s proposal for Cordoba’s


center and neighborhoods produced cultural centers and pedestrian malls and recuperated
the river.

The 1990s continued the multiplicity of architectural tendencies. The playfulness and
acceptance of many influences of this period are shown by the hybrid architecture of
Testa, particularly in his complex at the Recoleta Cultural Center (1994). The intention to
insert new architecture without disrupting the urban was demonstrated in Cordoba by the
Nuevocentro Shopping (1990) by Gramatica, Guerrero, Morini, Pisani, Rampulla, and
Urtubey. This group also designed the new Justice Palace of Cordoba (1998).

The 1990s was also characterized by a new care for tectonics and finesse in details, as
in the work of the Studio Benadon, Berdichevsky, and Cherny, particularly in the
Organon Argentina offices (1997) in Bajo Belgrano and the CAPSA, Capex, offices
(1997) in Vicente Lopez.

Popular architecture, environmental issues, hybridization, identity, regionalism, and
rehabilitation, all imvolving both practical and poetic considerations, have been the
dominant elements of Argentinean architecture in the last 20 years. In a country where
economic and cultural dependence is still debated, the late decades have been marked by
an architecture more responsive to ecological and social concerns and the search for the
appropriate use of technology with local resources. The tension between these local
concerns and its universal vocation makes the architecture of the 20th century in
Argentina one of the most vital and interesting in the world.

JOSE BERNARDI

Alvarez, Mario Roberto (Argentina); Ambasz, Emilio (Argentina, United States);

Buenos Aires, Argentina; Manteola, Sanchez Gomez, Santos, Solsona, Vifoly

(Argentina); Pelli, Cesar (Argentina); Testa, Clorindo (Argentina); Williams, Amancio
(Argentina)

Further Reading

There is no available historical survey of architecture in Argentina available in English.
Neither are there comprehensive studies of architectural tendencies and movements
within the larger context of society. Partial chapters or critical essays on architectural
issues in Argentina writtenby the most important historians and critics of the country can
be found scattered in recent books dealing with Latin America or in magazines devoted to
particular architects or works. The most relevant critics of the country are Marina
Waisman, Ramon Gutierrez, Jorge Glusberg, and Jorge Francisco Liernur. They represent
distinct yet very influential points of view. Some of the books mentioned here reflect the
renewed interest in regionalist architecture and the dialogue among major protagonists of
architecture in Latin America in general and Argentina in particular.
48 (July-August 1994) (special issue titled “America Latina”)
— __ edited by Daniela Pastore, Gangemi Editore, 1998
Braun, Clara, and Julio Cacciatore (coordinacién), Buenos Aires, Argentina: Fundacion
TIAU, 1996
Bullrich, Francisco, [Contemporary Argentinean Architecture: A Survey of Architecture
from 1950 to 1963 in Argentina], Buenos Aires: Ediciones Nueva Vision, 1963
Bullrich, Francisco, {Latin American Architecture, 1930-1970], Buenos Aires: Editorial
Sudamericana, 1969

32/33 (Spring/Summer 1994) (special issue titled “Other Americas,” edited by John Loomis)
Fernandez Cox, Cristian, et al., [Modernity and Postmodernity in Latin America], Bogota,
Colombia: ESCALA, 1991
Glusberg, Jorge, (English and Spanish in parallel texts), London: Academy Editions, 1981
Glusberg, Jorge, [Brief History of Architecture in Argentina], Buenos Aires: Editoral
Claridad, 1991
Gutiérrez Z., Ramén, [Architecture and Urbanism in Ibero America], Madrid: Ediciones
Catedra, 1983
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955
institute Argentine de Investigaciones en Historia de la Arquitectura y el Urbanismo, {Latin
American Architecture: Thinking and Proposals], Buenos Aires: Ediciones Summa, 1991
Liernur, Jorge Francisco, {Latin American Architecture: The Last Twenty Years], Milan:
Electa, 1990
Liernur, Jorge Francisco (proyecto y direccién general), (Historical Dictionary of
Architecture: Habitat and Urbanism in Argentina], Buenos Aires: Sociedad Central de
Arquitectos, 1992
Liernut, Jorge Francisco, Buenos Aires: Fondo Nacional de las Artes, 2001
inilla Acevedo, Mauricio (coordinador), [Togo Diaz: The Architect and His City], Bogota,
Colombia: Escala, 1993
Roca, Miguel Angel (editor), London: Academy Editions, 1995
Taylor, Brian Brace, | London: Mimar Publications, 1992
Waisman, Marina, and César Naselli, (Ten Latin American Architects], Seville: Consejeria de
Obras Publicas y Transportes, 1989
(September 1992-February 1993) (Guido Canella, editor)

ARQUITECTONICA

Architecture firm, United States

Arquitectonica began as a Miami firm created in 1976 by a group of young architects
under the leadership of Hervin A.R. Romney and Bernado Fort-Brescia. Andrés Duany
and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk joined the pair a few months later, with Laurinda Spear
arriving the following year. By 1984 Plater-Zyberk and Duany and Romney had left to
establish their own firms. Arquitectonica’s current principles include Sergio Bakas and
Jenifer Briley, who joined the firm in the early 1980s.

Under the leadership of Spear and Fort-Brescia, Arquitectonica expanded to design
buildings in several countries, particularly in Fort-Brescia’s birthplace of Lima, Peru, and
in the Pacific Rim nations of Asia. Although it has some small residential designs to its
credit, Arquitectonica has become known for large-scale projects: apartment towers,
hotels and convention centers, sports facilities, government institutions, shopping malls,
and financial office complexes.

Arquitectonica’s design approach has been described as Latin modern, tropical
modem, new modernism, Postmodern surrealism, Mediterranean, or Caribbean and as
manifesting influences of Russian Constructivism, Deconstructivism, and Art Deco. One
of Laurinda Spears’s early designs that attracted widespread attention was The Spear
House (1978), also known as the Pink House, the firm’s first completed work. Located on

the Biscayne Bay waterfront in suburban Miami Shores, this building uses glass block,
concrete, and stucco, rendered in five different shades of pink, with angular geometric
forms highlighted in white, to boldly proclaim its allegiance to its tropical setting. The
long, narrow plan stretches along the street with a high wall of opaque glass, assuring
privacy. In contrast, the elevation overlooking the Bay is a busy collage of windows,
balconies, and recesses based on multiples of a square. This motif is repeated, both front
and rear, in a landscaped grid of square patio stones.

The first large-scale designs by Arquitectonica included a quartet of Miami apartment
buildings: the Babylon (1979), followed by the Atlantis Condominiums (1982), the
Palace (1982), and the Imperial (1984). The Atlantis Condominiums, in particular,
captured international interest with their deconstructivist forms. This long and narrow
high-rise, with its single curved end, was designed to be seen from a moving vehicle. The
street elevation was a glazed curtain wall, whereas a large-scale, brilliant royal blue grid
defined the opposite facade. The element that attracted most attention for the firm was the
building’s sky court: a four-story-high opening punched clean through the center of the
building. By audaciously playing with a building’s fundamental sense of enclosure, the
Atlantis building was a success and was followed by numerous commissions within the
Miami region.

Some of Arquitectonica’s entertainment and retail projects, such as the All-Star Sports
and Music Resorts (1994) at Lake Buena Vista, Florida, play with popular imagery and
imagination. Designed for Disney World’s visitors, Arquitectonica used brilliantly
colored and oversized sports paraphernalia, such as basketballs and hoops, baseball bats,
sports pennants, and megaphones, to decorate these resort motels and ancillary facilities.
Eschewing subtlety in favor of the blatantly obvious, such motifs assault both the senses
and the imagination, yet manage to complement and enhance the visitor experience of
Disney’s fantasy world.

The Banque de Luxembourg’s headquarters (1994) respects the character of its owners
and its urban context. Situated on a site at the end of a homogenous range of traditional
European financial institutions, the Banque’s interlocked solid and transparent volumes
allude to both stability and progressiveness. The core section of the Banque is a dark
black parallelogram, enclosed on three sides by a stolid and rational cantilevered facade
of locally available Chassagne stone. The contrasting volume, a dark green, curved glass
tower, slices abruptly into its stone counterpart at the point where the Royal Boulevard
curves around the site. To keep within the footprint of the relatively small and angular
site and to conform with the profile of the existing streetscape, several office and parking
evels were constructed below grade. To the rear of the main building is a formal garden
inking it with a reception area in a house constructed to mimic others along the street.

Although the massive United States Embassy (1996) in Lima was designed according
to the stringent security and safety requirements required for American government
facilities in for eign countries, Arquitectonica’s designers enlivened a conventional
building type with multicolored brick, metal, and tinted glass, laid in complex geometric
patterns. The exposed portion of the entrance facade contains few windows, but behind a
high courtyard wall of Inca-style stone panels welded to steel plates, and at the rear of the
Embassy, an irregular arrangement of windows and squares of gold-plated metal,
interspersed with elongated strips of tinted glass, help to create an intricate geometric


collage, intended to be reminiscent of a pre-Colombian textile. On this elevation, a
grandly scaled ceremonial entrance of alternating stone and metal frames steps out to the
face of the building.

Westin Times Square Hotel, New York City, designed by
Arquitectonica (2002)
Photo © Norman McGrath
Arquitectonica’s first major commission in New York, the Westin Times Square Hotel
(2002), is but one component in a massive and, at times, controversial redevelopment
project called E-Walk. Even though the actual project site on 42nd Street is removed
from the Square itself, the lower levels of the hotel and entertainment complex emulate
the big and brassy commercial ambience of Times Square. The 47-story hotel is visually
split in two by a recessed convex chasm containing lighting systems that project a broad
swath of light skyward. One side of the structure is clad in blue glass panels, and the
opposite is covered with gold-tinted glass. Because the tower’s base is supported above
the lower entertainment complex, innovative seismic insulators were designed to enable
the tower to sway with the wind, whereas the lower building remains stationary.
RHODA BELLAMY

Deconstructivism; Duany and Plater-Zyberk (United States); Lapidus, Morris
(United States); Miami (FL), United States; Supermodernism

Selected Works

Spear House, Biscayne Bay, Miami, 1978

Babylon Apartment House, Miami, 1979

Atlantis Condominiums, Miami, 1982

Palace Apartment House, Miami, 1982

Imperial Apartment House, Miami, 1984

All-Star Sports and Music Resorts, Lake Buena Vista, Florida, 1994
Banque de Luxembourg headquarters, 1994

United States Embassy, Lima, Peru, 1996

Philips Arena, Atlanta, Georgia, 1996

Westin Times Square Hotel, New York City, 2002

Further Reading

Dunlop, Beth, Washington D.C.: American Institute of Architects, 1991

Dunlop, Beth, and Roberto Schezen (photographer), New York: The Monacelli Press Inc., 1996
Leon, Luis Aguilar, “El nuevo rostro urbano,” (January 2000)

Stein, Karen D., “A Fortress with No Apologies,” (1996)

Stein, Karen D., “Gaining Currency,” (January 1995)

Vonier, Frangoise, and Thomas Vonier, “Auditorium de Dijon, Dijon, France,” (May 1999)
Zevon, Susan, “Florida House for a Family of Eight,” (1998)

ART DECO

The term is a now firmly established designation for an aesthetic of the late 1920s and
1930s that in its own day was called In architecture, the style took various forms, each
of which has prompted historians to devise different identifying terminology. In the
1960s, the more ornamental phase of popular modernism was dubbed Art Deco, echoing
the name of the 1925 Parisian where the style’s formal design motifs, patterns, and
decorative predilections were first observed. Recognizing in Deco a character both
modern and abstract but a style that nevertheless avoided the white, volumetric, and
planar reductivism of the emerging 1920s “Bauhaus Modern,” some historians referred to
the style as “modernistic,” that is, pseudomodern or approaching modern. These and
other design terms and stylistic labels have been applied to the several dimensions of Art
Deco architecture after the mid-1920s.

Inspired by the aerodynamic forms and kinetic lines emerging from the drafting
boards of industrial designers, a “Streamline Moderne” architectural style (dubbed
“nautical moderne” when marine imagery was most explicit) evolved as one of the

quintessential styles of the 1930s. In architecture, it borrowed from the streamlining
evidenced in the forms of new transportation machines—planes, trains, ships, and
automobiles—and streamlining was most frequently applied to buildings that served
these transportation machines: air terminal buildings, bus terminals, marinas, and
especially such roadside buildings as diners, gas stations, and car dealerships.
Recognizing that streamlining’s paring down of moderne forms to the ultimate teardrop
was paralleled by a general economy of line and form and that this restraint was
considered appropriate in a period of economic depression, writers employed the term
Depression modern to describe elements of selected examples of the later Deco-era
aesthetic. Finally, when 1930s government architects looked to a restrained classicism to
communicate an image of authority and order, a Deco-era “modern classic” derivation
presented itself in county courthouses, New Deal-era post offices, and other government
architecture.

The Art Deco period in architecture, therefore, was polyglot and multifarious, an age
in which Progressivism and modernity were embedded in different forms in which the
more conservative Deco stylists, often traditional Beaux-Arts-trained designers, might
express their ornamental predispositions in more abstract modern terms. Likewise,
classicists might mollify earlier Edwardian enthusiasm for the baroque in favor of a new
monumentalism that was simpler, plain surfaced, and grand without being grandiloquent.
Finally, the more avant-garde modernists offered a populist, ornamental, and colorful of
recognized, albeit abstracted, motifs.

The Art Deco era was fundamentally a 20th-century machine age. In Deco reliefs and
architectural ornament, a knife-edged profile transformed human, animal, and plant forms
into lowrelief sculptural representations treated as faceted machine-cut patterns of light
and shadow. Similarly, a Streamline Moderne building’s curved corners, neon signage,
marquees, and “drivethrough” features, as found in diners, bus terminals, and gas stations
alike, merely borrowed forms from the period’s machine, especially from transportation
and industrial designs. Architecture was characterized by a transmogrification of
aerodynamic shapes and surfaces from streamlined fenders, curved car bodies, and
zephyrlike lines of speed that, by the 1930s, shaped and accented Chrysler Air Flows,
Hupmobiles, Cords, and other contemporary sedans and coupes of the day. Comparable
architectural elements emerged from designs first shaping airplane fuselages and wing
sections, from the aerodynamic shrouds enveloping the Pennsylvania S-1 locomotive or
bull-nosed Studebakers of Raymond Loewy, or from the hydrodynamic hull of a Norman
Bel Geddes futuristic ocean liner. Moreover, during the Deco era, technology (in the form
of steel-frame construction, reinforced concrete, and plate glass) provided the means to
build skyscrapers higher than ever before, making the Chrysler Building (1930), the
Empire State Building (1930-31), Rockefeller Center (1931-40), and indeed, the entire
skyline of New York icons of the age.

The period was also quintessentially an era of popular modernism. Cosmetic Deco and
modeme facades brought a face-lift to Main Street America by an applied architectonic
skin of colorful, glazed terra-cotta, Vitrolite, ceramic or gloss metallic panels, glass brick,
neon, and other Deco-era materials. At the same moment that European modernists such
as Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe were defining an avant-
garde modern style based on lack of or minimal color, no ornament, and an emphasis of
volume over mass, popular ornamentalists in America rejected the utilitarian for the

visual, the intellectual for the sensual, the rational for the expressive, and the sociological
for the purely decorative. Art Deco was jazzy, bright, sexy, loud, and visually appealing.
If Bauhaus modernism and the International Style appeared to limit its focus to
functionalism at the exclusion of emotionalism or expressionism, Art Deco found its
appeal in the very color and excitement that polychromatic stylized facades, neon
lighting, and zigzag profiles communicated.

Recognizing Deco’s increasing presence on Main Street, in Kress and F.W.Woolworth
five-and-dimes, in arty neighborhood theaters with their sunburst splashed facades, and in
chic department stores and other commercial emporia, historians have characterized the
Art Deco style as transcending social class, as egalitarian and democratic, and as the
modern aesthetic of the people. Even today, a revived Art Deco is in evidence at populist
marketplaces as the preferred style of perfumeries and at the cosmetic displays of
department stores. This neo-Deco, both chic and cheap, parallels the rebirth in the 1980s
of the Streamline Moderne in roadside architecture as evidenced in nostalgic diners and
drive-through hamburger chains.

Landmarks of Art Deco architecture, therefore, are less often palaces of royalty,
cathedrals, or monumental institutional buildings and more often commercial, Main
Street, and roadside structures—indeed, department stores were nicknamed “people’s
palaces,” and skyscrapers of the period were called modernistic cathedrals of commerce.
Among the most noteworthy were Timothy Pflueger’s Paramount Theater (1929) in
Oakland, California; G.Albert Lansberg’s Warner Brothers’ Western (Wiltern) Theater
(1930) in Los Angeles; B.Marcus Priteca’s Pantages Theater (1929) in Hollywood; and
Donald Deskey’s Radio City Music Hall (1931) in New York. Only occasionally was the
style of cathedrals of commerce applied to genuinely religious edifices: First Church of
Christ, Scientist, in Perth, Western Australia, designed by Ochiltree and Hargreave, is a
notable late Deco church of 1939, although perhaps the best-known religious building of
the idiom is the 1929 Boston Avenue Methodist Episcopal Church in Tulsa, Oklahoma,
by Ada M.Robinson and Bruce Goff.

The true cathedral of commerce on Main Street, however, was the department store,
which ranged from such landmarks as Bullock’s Wiltshire store (Los Angeles, 1928) by
John and Donald Parkinson to scores of F.W.Woolworths, Kress fiveand-dimes, and
small boutiques in small towns nationwide. However, the vertical giants of commerce
were the skyscrapers. These were sometimes actually dressed in a Gothic Deco, as at
Atlanta’s City Hall (1930) by G.Lloyd Preacher. Generally, however, the Deco
skyscraper rose skyward to form towering commercial ziggurats and office buildings in
New York whose prominence advertised sponsoring companies. McGraw-Hill (1931,
Raymond Hood), Barclay-Vesey Telephone (1923-26, Ralph T.Walker), Chrysler (1930,
William Van Alen), and RCA Victor (1931, Cross and Cross) were the ultimate Deco
exemplars of capitalist architecture.


Barbizon Apartment Hotel, Ocean Drive, Art Deco district, Miami

Beach

© Historic American Buildings Survey/Library of Congress

Indeed, the extensive construction of taller urban office
towers during the Deco era has prompted some historians
“skyscraper style.” Distinctive zigzag setbacks brought Deco
syncopated profile, a feature that was initially required by the

buildings and apartment
to label Art Deco the
skyscrapers a jazz-aged
916 zoning ordinance in

New York but soon developed as a style. Beyond the New York landmarks cited

previously, Manhattan’s Deco masterpieces included the Wald

orf Astoria Hotel (1930,

Schultze and Weaver), the Chanin Building (1927-29, Sloan and Robertson), the

Panhellenic Tower (1929, John Mead Howells), and the Film C
Ely Jacques Kahn). The 450 Sutter Building (1928, Timothy P.

enter Building (1928-29,
flueger) in San Francisco

and the W.W.Orr Building (1930, Pringle and Smith) in Atlanta are two medical office
buildings whose relief panels and ornament reflect the popular modern style, the former’s

decoration employing Mayan elements, the latter a Decoesq

ue serpent and staff of

Asclepius. Among the ornamentalists enriching Deco buildings were muralists and

sculptors. Among the most representative period murals were
1934 and 1943 for 1,100 local post offices under the sponsors!
Department’s Section of Painting and Sculpture (later known as

those executed between
hip of the U.S. Treasury
the Section of Fine Arts).

Most notable among Deco sculptors was Lee Lawry, whose relief carvings and sculpture

may be seen at the Nebraska State Capitol (1919-32, Bertram G.Goodhue), the Louisiana
State Capitol (1930-32, Weiss, Dreyfous, and Seiferth), and Bok Tower (Mountain Lake
Singing Tower, 1929, Milton B.Medary) as well as at Rockefeller Center.

In southern Florida, Miami Beach preserves an entire historic district of Art Deco
hotels, apartment buildings, and other period landmarks by architects Henry Hohauser,
L.Murray Dixon, Anton Skislewicz, and others. Notable works include Hohauser’s Hotel
Park Central (1937) and Hotel Cardozo (1939), Dixon’s Marlin Hotel (1939) and Ritz
Plaza (1940), and Skislewicz’s Breakwater Hotel (1939) and Plymouth Hotel (1940).
These works synthesize modern and Art Deco elements into a unique blend of 1930s
ornament, streamlining, and ribbon windows accented in these oceanside structures with
local decorative references and regional themes, including waves, palm trees, fountains,
flamingos, fish, sails, portholes, ship bows, and rising bubbles. Since the 1980s,
revitalization of the beachfront Deco color palette on refurbished facades and in
rehabilitated hotel lobbies in a Postmodern vein has created a “tropical Deco” style that
has transformed an originally predominantly white architecture into a wash of pastels,
rainbow figure-ground profiles, and neon-enhanced pizzazz. In Los Angeles, Sunset
Towers (1929, Leland A.Bryant) is comparable in form to Miami Beach’s smaller-scale
residential blocks, and further echoes of this domestic Deco found its way into private
residences.

The only large collection of like Art Deco structures to rival Miami Beach is the town
of Napier, New Zealand, substantially destroyed by an earthquake and rebuilt within a
short period of the 1930s. Both a Mediterranean or Spanish Mission style and a Deco-
informed international modern informed nearby Hastings, New Zealand, but the
rebuilding of the commercial district of Napier provides an unusual concentration of
period architecture in a city well off the beaten track. Moreover, a remarkable body of
Art Deco architecture survives in major Australian cities including theater architecture by
William Leighton (Windsor, 1937, in Nedlands and Perth) and Samuel Rosenthal
(Beacon, 1937, South Fremantle) as well as Deco office buildings in Sydney (City
Mutual Building, 1934-36, Emil Sodersten) and Melbourne (ACA Building, c.1936,
attributed to Hennessy and Hennessy). A strong presence of streamlining and flatroofed,
ribbon-windowed modernism informed this region’s international Deco, with Australian
architects achieving designs of additional interest when ornamental accents included
kookaburra birds and other native references. Australia’s quintessential Art Deco
landmark, however, is a monumental Deco classic: C. Bruce Dellit’s powerful Anzac
Memorial in Hyde Park, Sydney, dating from 1934. Embodying the monumental form,
decorative detail, and spirit of the best formal, public side of the Art Deco style, the
Anzac Memorial, like smaller monuments of the period nationwide, is an emotionally
charged memorial to the Australian and New Zealand fallen from the world wars.

Such a restrained yet monumental modern classic was foreshadowed in the World War
I memorials by British architect Sir Edwin Lutyens, including his Whitehall Cenotaph
(1919-22) in London and reflected in the work of Paul Cret (Folger’s Shakespeare
Library, 1929-31, Washington, D.C., and National Naval Medical Center, 1939-41,
Bethesda, Maryland). The Palais de Chaillot (1937) by Carlu, Boileau, and Azéma is
Paris’s best example. In the United States during the same period, the modern classic
phase of Art Deco architecture is represented by Goodhue’s Los Angeles City Hall
(1922), San Francisco’s Veterans Hospital (1934, designed by the U.S. Treasury


Department’s supervising architect), and Atlanta’s Federal Post Office Annex (1931-33,
A.Ten Eyck Brown).

The modern classic and Depression modern character finds its way into Holabird and
Roche’s Chicago Board of Trade Building (1929-30) and the same architects’ Chicago
Daily News Building (1929). However, it is given its most evocative representation in
Hugh Ferriss’s renderings of dramatic urban towers, as published in his of 1929, whose
images appeared immediately brought to fruition in Buffalo’s City Hall (1929-31) by
George J.Dietel and John J.Wade. Indeed, Ferriss’s influence is seen as late as the 1990s,
as evidenced by Rabun Hatch and Associates’ GLG Grand (1992) in Atlanta.

The 1939 New York World’s Fair closed the late moderne era with clear evidence that
the decade had been dominated by streamlining. At the fair, the General Motors
Highways and Horizons Exhibit, including the Futurama, presented the World of
Tomorrow as envisioned by Norman Bel Geddes, a world of and for the automobile
encouraging the free-flowing movement of goods and people across the continent. In
1932 Bel Geddes had published his industrial designs (particularly planes, trains, and
cars) in The streamlined phase of Art Deco focused the attention of designers on
roadside architecture. W.W. Arrasmith of Louisville, Kentucky, designed bus depots for
Greyhound, including those for Evansville, Indiana (1938), Washington, D.C. (1939),
and Atlanta (1940), the latter now hidden under a hideous “modernization” two decades
ago. George D.Brown’s Atlantic Greyhound Bus Terminal in Columbia, South Carolina,
shows the influence of Arrasmith’s streamlining that informed such structures nationally.
Similarly, Texaco commissioned Walter Dorwin Teague to design standardized service
stations, and variations on five models were sited at prime corner building sites
nationwide.

In private and public realms alike, electronics, transportation, radio communication,
and other scientific and technological ad vances were viewed as signs of the progress of
the age, and images of these modern marvels adorned murals and ceiling paintings and
shaped neon outlines in signage and advertising. Representations of the machine
informed industrial photography, motion picture and theater sets, and the sharp-edged
profiles of Charles Sheeler landscapes and Ferdinand Leger figures. In architecture, the
Deco-era design impulses, in Streamline Moderne, modern classic, or faceted Art Deco
style, were a synthesis of tradition and Progressive design, nature and the machine, and
the ornamental as well as the abstract. In all, Art Deco architecture was both modern and
popular, and although associated with known designers and stylists, some of its most
ubiquitous forms are anonymous and found along the roadside.

ROBERT M.CRAIG
Bauhaus; Chrysler Building, New York City; Empire State Building, New York
City; Movie Theater/Cinema; Roadside Architecture; Rockefeller Center, New York City

Further Reading

Appelbaum, Stanley, and Richard Wurts, New York: Dover, 1977

Battersby, Martin, | New York: Walker, and London: Studio Vista, 1971

Battersby, Martin, | New York: Walker, and London: Studio Vista, 1969

Bayer, Patricia, | Secaucus, New Jersey: Wellfleet Press, and Oxford: Phaidon, 1988
Breeze, Carla, New York: Rizzoli, 1991

Bush, Donald J., © New York: Braziller, 1975
Capitman, Barbara Baer, New York: Dutton, 1988
Capitman, Barbara Baer, Michael D.Kinerk, and Dennis W. Wilhelm, New York:
Viking Studio Books, 1994
Craig, Robert M., Gretna, Louisiana: Pelican, 1995
Craig, Robert M., “Atlanta’s Moderne Diner Revival: History, Nostalgia, Youth, and Car
Culture,” «19, no. 2 (1996)
Crowe, Michael F., New York: Viking Studio Books, 1995
Duncan, Alastair, London: Thames and Hudson, and New York: Abrams, 1986
Ferriss, Hugh, § New York: Washburn, 1929; reprint, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
Architectural Press, 1986
Gebhard, David, New York and Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley, 1996
Geddes, Norman Bel, Boston: Little Brown, 1932; London: Lane, 1934
Greif, Martin, New York: Universe Books, 1975
Gutman, Richard J.S., and Elliott Kaufman, New York: Harper and Row, 1979; revised
edition, as by Gutman, New York: HarperPerennial, 1993
Hillier, Bevis, London: Studio Vista, 1968; revised edition, New York: Schocken

Books, 1985
Hillier, Bevis, (exhib. cat.), New York: Dutton, and London: Studio Vista, 1971
Jennings, Jan (editor), Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1990
Meikle, Jeffrey L., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Temple University Press, 1979
Pulos, Arthur J., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1983
Robinson, Cervin, and Rosemarie Haag Bletter, New York: Oxford University
Press, 1975

Trétiack, Philippe, Paris: Assouline, 1998; as translated by Cynthia Calder, New
York: Universe/Vendome, 1999
Vieyra, Daniel L, New York: Collier Books, and London: Collier Macmillan,
1979
Viack, Don, New York: Harper and Row, 1974
Weber, Eva, New York: Exeter Books, 1985; as | London: Bison Books, 1985
Weingartner, Fannia (editor), (exhib. cat.), Dearborn, Michigan: Henry Ford
Museum and Greenfield Village, 1986
Wilson, Richard Guy, Dianne Pilgrim, and Dickran Tashjian, (exhib. cat.), New
York: Brooklyn Museum, 1986
Wirz, Hans, and Richard Striner, Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press,
1984

ART NOUVEAU (JUGENDSTIL)

Art Nouveau was a vibrant but short-lived phenomenon that flourished but from 1890 to
1910 and touched on all the visual arts. Fashion and furniture, pots and paintings, books
and buildings, no object was too small or too large, too precious or too ordinary, to be
shaped by the designer working according to the ideals—moral and social as well as

aesthetic—associated with the Art Nouveau, even though these ideals were never
codified in a coherent manifesto and were inflected according to the place wherein they
were practiced.

Although historians may question the extent, chronologically and geographically, as
well as the very validity of an Art Nouveau style, several characteristics that bind its
representatives together may be credibly summarized: first, a desire to avoid the
historicism so dominant during the 19th century, using as inspiration Nature in all its
fertility and heterogeneity; second, an emphasis on the expressive power of form and
color and an aspiration to refine and elevate the material world; third, a determination to
erase the distinction between the fine and the applied arts, between the designer and the
craftsperson, between art and every-day life; and fourth, a willingness to experiment with
materials, transforming the character of traditional ones, like stone, stained glass, and
mosaic, and inventing new uses and shapes for recently developed ones, above all cast
and wrought iron. In architecture and the decorative arts, there is a heightened
appreciation of the role of ornament, but ornament that was novel in its formal character
and was not merely applied to, but integrated with, structure.

If there were influences from the distant past in time and space, they did not lead to
the imitative revivals so typical of the 19th century. Although Japanese, Islamic, and
Javanese art, medieval architecture, and rococo interiors were studied, the lessons learned
were assimilated into a creative synthesis intended to respond to the dawning of the new
century. More immediate sources were the critic-theorists of the Gothic Revival, notably
John Ruskin (1819-1900) and E.E. Viollet-le-Duc (1814-79), and figures associated with
the English Arts and Crafts and Aesthetic Movements, such as William Morris (1834—
96). If their goals were at times interpreted in contradictory ways, the social and
professional reforms these thinkers embraced anticipated many aspects of the positive
revolution in design accomplished under Art Nouveau’s aegis.

The drive to embrace the new and to break from the past is embodied in the very
names that designate this phenomenon: in France, in Germany, in Spain, — the
Netherlands, in Russia, and Art Nouveau in English-speaking lands. Its antiacademic
stance is embodied in the term used in Austria and Eastern Europe. The two Italian
designations identify sources: suggesting both the quest for freedom and the English
influence (the shop, Liberty’s of London, was one of the earliest purveyors of goods that
appealed to Art Nouveau sensibilities), and implying formal genesis in the world of
plants. Its detractors may have dubbed it the (Netherlands) or the Spook Style (Great
Britain), but these epithets did not prevent its widespread adoption.

Art Nouveau was at once international and regional. The principles of originality,
organic integrity, and symbolic employment of ornament were translated according to
national traditions. Especially in Scandinavia, Scotland, Switzerland, Russia, and Eastern
Europe, National Romanticism was a component of Art Nouveau, and stylized peasant
and vernacular motifs as well as the memory of local medieval buildings flavored its
productions. Yet another principle of differentiation is whether the language is
predominately curvilinear or rectilinear. In Belgium, France, and Spain, the curvilinear
branch, where symmetry and repetition were assiduously avoided and sinuous vegetal
shapes informed both structure and ornament, held sway; the rectilinear, where geometry
controlled the stylization of natural forms, was preponderant in the Netherlands, the
Austro-Hungarian empire, Scotland, and the United States. Nevertheless, one can


instantly recognize in the particular national or local permutations the visual and tactile
elements associated with the Art Nouveau.

Art Nouveau architects sought the challenge of unprecedented building types, like
rapid transit stations and department stores, and did not confine their commissions to
domestic architecture, although private houses—Hill House, Helensborough (1902-04)
by Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868-1928); the David Gamble house in Pasadena
(1908) by Greene and Greene (Charles Sumner [1868-1957] and Henry Mather [1870—
1954]}—and blocks of flats—Castel Beranger, Paris (1895-97) by Hector Guimard
(1967-1942); Majolikahaus, Vienna (1898-99) by Otto Wagner (1841—1918)—provide
some of the most noteworthy examples. Thus, the Paris Metro employed Guimard, and
the Viennese Stadtbahn commissioned Wagner to create appropriate structures for this
most contemporary of urban facilities. La Samaritaine, Paris (1903-05) by Frantz
Jourdain (1847-1935) and Carson, Pirie, Scott, Chicago (1899-1904) by Louis Sullivan
(1856-1924) testify to Art Nouveau’s commercial attraction for shoppers.

Various paradoxes complicate the definition of Art Nouveau. Fantastic

elements have led commentators to dub its disciples

a ae
{THE GLALGOW
INSTITYTE
ity FINE ARTS
[bh Wd

a

Art Nouveau lithograph poster for the opening of The Glasgow
Institute of the Fine Arts, designed by Frances Macdonald ( 1985)
© Library of Congress

“irrational,” yet many of the architects were rationalist in their sophisticated approach to
technology, just as most were motivated by a wish to democratize society. Some of its
acolytes were fiercely individualistic, yet others worked cooperatively in communes and
workshops. Its products frequently were extravagantly luxurious and made to order for
rich patrons, yet many were mass-produced, and the vocabulary, as manifested in posters,
tableware, and textiles, appealed markedly to popular taste. The antagonism between the
machine-made and the handcrafted that raged during the 19th century was to some extent
reconciled in the Art Nouveau.

It was one of the first movements to be disseminated via specialized periodicals that
enhanced its reach: (Brussels-Antwerp, 1892), (London, 1893), (Berlin, 1895),
(Munich, 1897), (Darmstadt, 1897), (Paris, 1898), and (Vienna, 1898) are only a
few of the magazines that proselytized for Art Nouveau architecture and design.

The concept of the (total work of art) was more potent than at any time since the
18th century. Thus, designers and artisans in many media played a crucial role, although
the architect, who controlled the overall setting, was especially powerful. One of the most
striking cases is the Belgian, Henri van de Velde (1863-1957), who began his career as a
painter and in 1895, at his home in Uccle, established an influential decorating enterprise.
He designed not only the building but everything within: furniture, table settings,
wallpaper, lighting fixtures, tapestries—even his wife’s clothing. Van de Velde went on
to provide Samuel Bing, the entrepreneur whose Parisian shop was called “Art Nouveau,”
with many of his trend-setting furnishings. A member of the avant-garde Belgian
organization, (Les XX), which had ties to French symbolism and the English Arts and
Crafts, Van de Velde was an important link between the various groups that fed into Art
Nouveau; in 1897 he moved to Germany and helped to crystallize the nascent His
career illustrates the cosmopolitan character of Art Nouveau.

One of the engines for the rapid spread of the Art Nouveau was the international
exhibition. The expositions at Paris in 1900 and Turin in 1902, where almost every
pavilion and its contents proclaimed Art Nouveau’s ascendency, may be considered the
high point of the movement. Other means of dissemination were the schools and
museums of the applied arts founded during the late 19th century, educating artisans and
the general public about the significance of the built environment. The Folkwang
Museum in Hagen, Germany, and the Austrian Museum of Applied Arts in Vienna
followed the lead of London’s Victoria and Albert Museum, established in the wake of
the first international (Crystal Palace) exposition, of 1851, to display decorative arts
worthy of emulation.

A curiosity of the movement was the tendency for some of its adherents, including
patrons, to launch workshops, firms, and even communities of like-minded souls. The

(Munich, 1897), (Amsterdam, 1900), and the (Vienna, 1903) all produced
decorative objects based on Art Nouveau principles. Colonies where artists could jointly
pursue the ideal of the initiated including the at Darmstadt, Germany, where Grand
Duke Ernst of Hesse in 1899 invited a number of designers to live and work.

Arguably the birthplace of mature Art Nouveau is Brussels, and the figure
most associated with its brilliance is Victor Horta. His Tassel House
(1893) is widely accepted as the first example of Art Nouveau

architecture: the sinuous curves of the organic two- and three-dimensional

ornament and the artful blending of masonry and metal, tile and stained
glass, were imitated throughout the continent. Horta’s greatest work, the
Maison de Peuple (1895-99; demolished), demonstrated the popular
aspect of the style. Not only could wealthy industrialists indulge their taste
for it, but their employees too recognized that it evoked their aspirations.
Thus the Belgium Social Democratic Workers’ Party elected the Art
Nouveau as the appropriate language for its new headquarters. The
striking building, emblazoned with the names of Karl Marx and other
socialists, seems to grow from its hilly site, its contours undulating as if to
conform to contextual dictates. The iron frame used in combination with
brick and stone permits a free plan with spaces of varied heights and
dimensions, perfect for accommodating the program’s differing functions,
revealed on the exterior through the individualized fenestration; nothing is
regular or repetitive. The main door resembles a mysterious cave or mouth
that draws one into its recesses, empathy being a quality exploited by
many Art Nouveau architects.

Majolikahaus, Vienna, designed by Otto Wagner (1898-99)
© GreatBuildings.com

Comparable in terms of naturalistic appearance, irregular footprint, and bold exploration
of kinesthetic and emotional responses to form and space are the Casa Mila (1906-10) in
Barcelona by Antonio Gaudi, and the Humbert de Romans building in Paris (1897-1901;
destroyed) by Guimard. Like the Belgian, the Catalan and the Frenchman were indebted
to Viollet-le-Duc, especially his projects using the new material of iron, but where Viollet

was still in thrall to his Gothic sources, this later trio subsumes them into a totally novel
vocabulary derived from flora and fauna. The devout Gaudi believed that “nature is
God’s architect” (Collins, 1960), whereas Guimard saw Nature as “a great book from
which to derive inspiration,” replacing the archaeological tomes of the revivalists.

The more rectilinear version of Art Nouveau retains nature as the basic source of
imagery but emphasizes the geometric substructure underlying organic forms, as
described with particular insight by the German theorist Gottfried Semper (1803-79), and
symmetry is not rejected. Works by H.P.Berlage, Wagner, Olbrich, and Josef Hoffmann
belong in this camp, as do those by designers in Britain and the United States with roots
directly in the Arts and Crafts movement (e.g., C.R.Ashbee, Mackintosh, Charles
Harrison Townsend, Frank Lloyd Wright, and the brothers Greene). Right angles and
straight lines prevail, the stylized decorative motifs are less intuitive and more cerebral,
and metal structure, although occasionally present, is subordinated to more conventiona.
materials like wood, stone, and brick, the latter often plastered.

Most of the architects of High Art Nouveau turned away from the style by the end of
the first decade of the 20th century, those from the curvilinear branch toward
Expressionism, those practicing the rectilinear version toward modernism or
academicism; in France and Austria, the Art Nouveau smoothly metamorphosed into Art
Deco. In the second half of the 20th century, sporadic Art Nouveau revivals have
occurred. Short its reign may have been, but Art Nouveau’s spell endures.

HELEN SEARING
Arts and Crafts Movement; Casa Mila, Barcelona; Gaudi, Antoni
(Spain); Greene, Henry M. and Charles S. (United States); Hoffmann,
Josef (Austria); Horta, Victor (Belgium); Mackintosh, Charles Rennie
(Scotland); Metro Station, Paris; Olbrich, Josef Maria (Austria); van de

Velde, Henri (Belgium); Vienna Secession; Wagner, Otto (Austria)

Further Reading

After its decisive rejection in the first decade of the 20th century, scholarly and popular
interest in Art Nouveau evaporated (although the course of Art Deco in many ways
recapitulated that of Art Nouveau), thanks in part to a revival of historicism but more
definitively to the triumph of international modernism, with its proscription against orna-
ment. Then in 1959 came the groundbreaking exhibition at New York’s Museum of
Modern Art. Whether renewed attention was driven by the exhibition or whether the
show itself was prompted by a sudden collecting frenzy for Art Nouveau objects is
difficult to ascertain, but what is clear is that the Art Nouveau gradually achieved a
respectability that it has not relinquished. The MoMA catalogue was important also
because it included architecture, although most subsequent publications continued to
emphasize the decorative arts until 1979, when Frank Russell edited a volume devoted to
architecture. Since then, the vital significance of architecture to the movement as a whole
has been recognized, and surveys do not fail to include buildings that fit within the canon.

Amaya, Mario, London: Studio Vista, 1966

Borsi, Franco, Brussels: M. Vokaer, 1974


Borsi, Franco, and Ezio Godoli, New York: Rizzoli, 1977
Borsi, Franco, and Ezio Godoli, New York: Rizzoli, 1986
Brunhammer, Yvonne, Houston: Rice University, 1976
Collins, George, New York: Braziller, 1960

Cremonan, Italo, Florence: Vallechi, 1964
Greenhalgh, Paul (editor), | London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 2000
Howard, Jeremy, Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1996

Lambourne, Lionel, Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith, 1980
Lenning, Henry, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1951
Pevsner, Nikolaus, New York: Praeger, 1968
Pevsner, Nikolaus, London: Faber and Faber, 1936
Pevsner, Nicolaus, and J.M.Richards (editors), | London: The Architectural Press, 1973
Rheims, Morris, translated by Patrick Evans, New York: Abrams, [1966]
Russell, Frank (editor), | London: Academy Editions, 1979
Schmutzler, Robert, — Stuttgart: Gerd Hatje, 1962; as translated by Edrouard Roditi,
London: Thames and Hudson, 1964
Selz, Peter, and Mildred Constantine (editors), — New York: Museum of Modern
Art, 1975
Silverman, Deborah, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989
Thiébaut, Philippe, and Bruno Girveau, | London: Thames and Hudson, 2000
Tschudi-Madsen, Stephen, London: Thames and Hudson, 1967
Varnedoe, Kirk, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1986
Weisberg, Gabriel, and Elizabeth Menon, New York: Garland, 1998

ARTS AND CRAFTS MOVEMENT

Although the Arts and Crafts movement dominated England between the years 1860 and
1915, its effects were felt around the world, especially in Western Europe and the United
States, well into the 1920s. Artwork associated with the Arts and Crafts movement is
characterized by a handcrafted aesthetic that embodied the principles of its English
founders: C.R.Ashbee, W.R. Lethaby, and William Morris, among others. The
philosophy these men advocated centered on their belief that the Industrial Revolution
had produced substandard goods with little artistic merit. In response to this situation,
they sought to reintroduce handmade products to the arts and to elevate the craftsman to a
more prominent position in the design professions. In refocusing the production of art
away from machines and toward individual designers, Arts and Crafts leaders hoped to
reform society by changing the way art was created, patronized, and appreciated in
English society.

The Arts and Crafts movement promoted the idea of truth in architecture, meaning that
a building should clearly express its structure, function, and material. An uncluttered
exterior and interior, without applied decoration to obscure the structure, was considered
the ideal, partly because the aesthetic was easily achieved without machines. This idea of
truth and clarity in architecture contrasted sharply with the Victorian aesthetic currently

in vogue in England in which elaborate and ornate decora-tions, usually multicolored and
machine-made, dominated architectural design. Ashbee, Lethaby, and Morris believed
that Victorian interiors hid truth and clarity from the viewer by obscuring the forms and
shapes of a building. To this end, the simpler aesthetic of the Arts and Crafts returned
truth to architecture and contrasted with the “false” art created by the machine.

The idea of a simple aesthetic had regional, national, and historic overtones. Leaders
of the Arts and Crafts movement argued that the corrupted state of artistic production
resulted from the negative influence of industrialization on Western, particularly English,
society. Therefore, artistic production could be reformed by reviving methods of art and
craft that predated the industrial era. As viewed by the Arts and Crafts founders, the
period that best exemplified the preferred mode of artistic production was the age of
English medieval architecture. Not only did English medieval architecture fully embody
the Arts and Crafts ideal of a simple and truthful aesthetic, but buildings of the style were
local and easily available for study. Most important, the forms of English medieva.
structures were already synonymous with the English architectural identity, and therefore
reviving English medieval art and craft promoted the English national identity through
architectural form. In using English medieval models, Ashbee, Lethaby, and Morris made
direct connections between the past and the present and between the historic and the
modern to make the Arts and Crafts aesthetic pertain directly to England.

The use of English medieval models also embodied the vision of craftsmen working
for a truthful aesthetic, which Arts and Crafts leaders strenuously advocated. In general,
English medieval structures had been constructed by laborers who worked with hand
tools to build a collective monument from honest artistic labor. Ashbee, Lethaby, and
Morris argued that because the work of these craftsmen was not mass-produced, it had
not been corrupted by the machine. Therefore, English medieval models served as
examples of how the individual craftsman could enhance the design of an aesthetic
masterpiece by ensuring that every part of the design received individual attention and
that every form was designed and created by hand. Ashbee, Lethaby, and Morris
envisioned groups of craftsmen, metalworkers, stonecutters, and carpenters working
together toward a finished product that combined a variety of different media. Inspired by
these medieval models, Arts and Crafts leaders believed that artistic production could
separate itself from the mechanized methods of the Victorian age to create a detailed and
truthful expression of its time and place.

Attention to detail resulted in an idea that was fundamental to the Arts and Crafts
movement: that of a total work of art. The Arts and Crafts aesthetic was not limited to
any one particular medium; in fact, Ashbee, Lethaby, and Morris argued that all arts
should be used to create a complete effect such that the whole became more than the sum
of its parts. Every aspect of an Arts and Crafts interior or structure, whether it was art or
architecture, was considered relevant to the design, and in this way the entire
environment was subject to consideration by a designer or a design team. To this end,
many Arts and Crafts workers began to experiment with processes that machines had
performed for decades, and crafts such as fabric dyeing and printing experienced a
renaissance as new methods were investigated and new objects produced.

Because the Arts and Crafts movement is a movement largely of ideas, it is difficult to
single out particular designers or works, or to identify particular forms as characteristic of
the Arts and Crafts style. In terms of architecture, Philip Webb’s Red House, in Upton,


Kent, commissioned by Morris in 1859, serves as one outstanding example of Arts and
Crafts architecture in England. Taking its name from its red brick construction, the design
of the Red House avoided all decoration that recalled a direct model and instead followed
the functional needs of Morris and his family. Murals, wall hangings, tapestries, and
wallpapers together created a homey and medieval ambience through natural motifs that
included animals, birds, flowers, and trees, all of which were native to the area or to
England. Designed and crafted by Morris, his wife Jane, Philip Webb, and Morris’s
friend Dante Gabriel Rosetti, the Red House expressed a relaxed and informal medieval
atmosphere where different artistic media conveyed a total aesthetic.

Arts and Crafts architecture relied on historic local and regional influences
to ensure that each house would wholly be a product of its place. Looking
back to earlier examples of Scottish domestic architecture, Charles Rennie
Mackintosh intended his 1903 Hill House, in Helensburgh,
Dunbartonshire, Scotland, to connect with the Scottish medieval past
through a re-use of medieval and local forms. Like that at the Red House,
Hill House’s facade is plain, with limited applied ornament. The exterior
consisted of smooth stucco with low, protective eaves; deep windows and
porches; and buttresses that were borrowed

Interior designs of Hill House, Helensburgh, Scotland, designed by
Charles Rennie Mackintosh ( 1903)
© Howard Davis/Greatbuildings.com

from nearby examples of the medieval country church. Inside, Hill House embodied the
same idea of a total work of art in its consideration of all aspects of the space. Dark wood
shaped in simple and linear forms decorated the walls, while the beams supporting the
upper stories were left open to view. Handcrafted furniture and plain, white walls created

a cozy effect, while the lighting filtered through wooden screens and lampshades to warm
the room. Mackintosh’s appreciation for the materials and his honest expression of the
structure through planar forms made Hill House fully represent the goals of the Arts and
Crafts movement.

The Arts and Crafts movement had greater impact on craft than on architecture, as
craftsmen were encouraged to incorporate many different artistic media into a single
product. Many Arts and Crafts designers worked in groups or partnerships, with each
partner specializing in a different process, such as printing or metalwork. Morris’s firm,
Morris, Marshall, Faulkner and Company, founded by Morris in 1861, serves as an
excellent example of this diversity, as the firm could produce wallpaper, furniture,
murals, stained glass, carvings, metalwork, and tapestries. The inclusion of different
artistic media not only added to the overall effect of the Arts and Crafts interior but also
recalled the idea of a medieval system in which different artists worked together, each
providing an essential and necessary component that enhanced the overall product.

The Arts and Crafts ideology and aesthetic was not limited to English and Scottish

designers. The reform efforts of Ashbee, Lethaby, Morris, and Mackintosh resonated
with designers of other nations, many of whom struggled with the issue of artistic
national identity, the impact of the machine on society, and the economic effect of
mechanized art. Each nation, however, tended to isolate and incorporate different aspects
of the ideology of the Arts and Crafts movement as they related to each nation’s context.
In the United States, for example, Morris’s ideas were complemented by the efforts of
Gustav Stickley, who promoted an agenda similar to Morris’s through his magazine,
For Stickley, a return to a handcrafted aesthetic not only promoted art and social reform
but also educated the public and provided many with the means to earn their own living.
Unlike the English Arts and Crafts leaders, Stickley was less concerned with evoking a
medieval atmosphere in his designs, especially because the medieval did not have a
connection to the American past. Instead, Stickley argued that the simple Arts and Crafts
aesthetic could enhance the social conditions of the worker. As a result Stickley chose to
harness the power of the machine in favor of the worker rather than at the worker’s
expense. Ultimately, Stickley’s more famous designs, such as the 1903 Morris chair,
were produced by his own workers using machine technology.
Outside of Stickley’s magazine and furniture empire, other American designers
worked to apply Arts and Crafts principles to American design. One team of designers,
Charles Sumner Greene and his brother, Henry Mather Greene, experimented with native
materials in the design of the 1908 David B.Gamble House in Pasadena, California.
Aesthetically, the Gamble House explored craftsmanship through a new venue that
merged nature with handcraft, such that the Gamble House expressed its total work of art
through a strong connection between building and landscape. In contrast to the Greene
Brothers’ design is the work of Frank Lloyd Wright, who used machines to create a
similar effect. The Robie House (1908) in Chicago is an example of Wright’s efforts to
use simple forms and low-hanging eaves to evoke a sense of movement between parts.
Like most other Arts and Crafts designers, Wright carefully considered the appearance of
the interior, using rich materials and patterns to create a sumptuous yet planar aesthetic.
Although Wright’s interiors relied on machines for their production, his interest in
promoting a unified interior and the straightforward use of natural materials resembled
ideas from the English Arts and Crafts leaders.


Like American designers, European designers placed more and less emphasis on
different aspects of the Arts and Crafts ideology. In Belgium and France, the Art
Nouveau movement, spearheaded by Samuel Bing, Victor Horta, and Hector Guimard,
sought to strike a new balance between modernity and handcraft through an emphasis on
naturalistic forms. In Barcelona, Spain, Antoni Gaudi explored regional identity through
the native materials he used to create an imaginative and unique architectural style.
Likewise, in Austria, the Vienna Secession movement, under the leadership of Otto
Wagner, advocated an artistic break from the past and experimented with simple forms
and planar volumes. All the products—art, architecture, and crafts—produced by French,
Belgian, Spanish, and Viennese designers in these movements borrowed from the Arts
and Crafts ideology, even if their work resulted in vastly different forms.

By 1914 the Arts and Crafts movement had faded from the architectural scene, and
new ideas moved into its place, taking English, American, and Western European
designers into the machine aesthetic and the International Style. Scholars recognized that
the Arts and Crafts movement had important links with the Modern movement, which
had first promoted the idea that architecture could reform society. Some designers, such
as Walter Gropius and Frank Lloyd Wright, had direct connections with Arts and Crafts
ideology and partook in the Arts and Crafts revolution of form, helping to refocus artistic
production from its classical roots to its modern agenda. Without the simplicity of the
Arts and Crafts movement and its emphasis on social reform, the Modern movement
would have lacked a certain strength and vigor. The Arts and Crafts movement represents
an important precursor to subsequent movements and the development of new forms for
architectural production.

CATHERINE W.ZIPF
Gaudi, Antoni (Spain); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Horta, Victor
(Belgium); Mackintosh, Charles Rennie (Scotland); Robie House,
Chicago; Stickley, Gustav (United States); Wagner, Otto (Austria);
Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

A good overview of the movement and the crafts it produced appears in Naylor 1989.
Cumming includes a more theoretical description of the ideas involved in the production
of Arts and Crafts goods. For biographical information on Morris, see Stansky. For
biographical information on Stickley, see Sanders. For women’s participation in the Arts
and Crafts movement, see Callen.

Anscombe, Isabelle, | New York: Rizzoli, and Oxford: Phaidon, 1991

Bowman, Leslie Greene, Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and
Boston: Bulfinch Press/Little Brown, 1990; London: Bulfinch/Little Brown, 1992
Brooks, H.Allen, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972; New York:

Norton, 1976
Callen, Anthea, New York: Pantheon, 1979; as London: Astragal, 1979
Clark, Robert Judson (editor), Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
1972

Coote, Stephen, London: Garamond, 1990; New York: Smithmark, 1995

Cumming, Elizabeth, and Wendy Kaplan, | New York: Thames and Hudson, 1991
Davey, Peter, New York: Rizzoli, 1980; as London: Architectural Press, 1980
Kaplan, Wendy (editor), Boston: Little Brown, 1987
MacCarthy, Fiona, London: Faber and Faber, 1994; New York: Knopf, 1995
Morris, William, London and New York: Penguin, 1993

Naylor, Gillian, London: Studio Vista, and Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press, 1971; new edition, London: Trefoil, 1990
Naylor, Gillian, et al., New York: Dutton, 1989
Sanders, Barry, New York: Wiley, 1996
Stansky, Peter, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1985
Stickley, Gustav, New York: Craftsmen, 1909; reprint, New York: Dover, 1979
Trapp, Kenneth R. (editor), New York: Abbeville Press, 1993

ARUP, OVE 1895-1988

Architectural engineer, England

Ove Arup was arguably one of the greatest engineers of the 20th century. Born in
1895 in Newcastle upon Tyne in England to Scandinavian parents, he first studied
philosophy and graduated from the University of Copenhagen in 1916. Six years later, he
received a second degree in engineering. This wide-ranging interest and curiosity was to
influence both his own work and that of others with whom he consulted. Throughout his
life—his practice Ove Arup and Partners grew to include more than 50 offices in 40
countries with a staff of almost 4,000—he retained a speculative yet rigorously
questioning approach to design.

Having qualified as a civil engineer and with a special interest in reinforced concrete,
Arup joined the Danish company Christiani and Nielsen in 1922, a company that
designed and built civil engineering structures. He worked in Hamburg before moving to
their London office, where he became chief designer in 1925.

With this experience not only in the design but also in the construction of structures,
Arup became increasingly interested in developing a holistic approach to design. His
particular skill in the use of a new material, reinforced concrete, created opportunities for
him to work with other designers who were committed to the ideals of the Modern
movement. Collaborating with Tecton (a group of young architects in London) and with
Berthold Lubetkin in particular, Arup was to play an influential role in the design of a
several iconic buildings of the period. The first was the Gorilla House (1933) at the
London Zoo, followed by the Penguin Pool (1934). Both explored the fluid forms made
possible by using reinforced concrete. He went on to work with Lubetkin on the design of
Highpoint One. This residential building in London was also built in reinforced concrete
but explored the potential of the material to create an eight-story tower.

The construction of Highpoint coincided with Arup’s move in 1934 to join J.L.Kier
and Company, the contractors who built the scheme. This project was especially
significant because it allowed Arup and Lubetkin to work on a design that required the
complete integration of architecture, structure, and building method. As a result, Arup


became increasingly enthusiastic about collaboration between the professions in building
design, an enthusiasm that motivated his own practice.

Established in 1946, the practice was formerly called Ove Arup and
Partners, Consulting Engineers, in 1949, flourishing

Finsbury Avenue Offices, London, designed by Ove Arup and
Associates (1984)

© Don Barker/GreatBuildings.com

in the postwar period with the reconstruction of cities and the design of numerous new
buildings and improved infrastructure. Arup was sought out by an increasing number of
architects, especially those who were interested in innovative forms of engineering,
integrative design, and the use of new materials. His work at this time included the
Brynmawr Rubber Factory (1952, Gwent) in Wales, designed with Architects Co-
Partnership; Michael Scott’s Bus Station and Offices (1952) in Dublin; and the
Hunstanton School (1954, London), designed by Alison and Peter Smithson. After the
young Danish architect Jarn Utzon won the competition to design the Sydney Opera
House in Australia in 1957, he asked Arup to collaborate on the design. Arup played a
central role in the translation of the architect’s early sketches into an outstanding building

defined by the famous series of elegant vaulted roofs. After the building opened to
acclaim in 1973, the material research and design studies established Arup’s reputation as
an engineer of great creativity and international standing.

Arup designed a number of significant civil engineering projects, including the
Kingsgate Footbridge (1963) over the River Wear in Durham, England. He brought
together structural and civil engineers, environmental engineers, building economists, and
architects in a parallel partnership, Arup Associates, to design buildings and engineering
structures. Ove Arup and Partners grew as a multidisciplinary consultancy and became
one of the largest engineering design practices in the world. This collaborative,
interprofessional way of working enhanced talent and made the practice a center for
design imnovation and research. After the Sydney Opera House, Arup and his colleagues
worked with the German engineer Frei Otto on the development of lightweight structures,
studies that were to result in projects such as the Garden Pavilion (1975) in Mannheim.
Collaboration with Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano on their competition entry for the
Centre Pompidou in Paris was awarded first prize in 1971. In 1979 a further collaboration
with Richard Rogers and another with Norman Foster resulted in successful designs for
limited competitions for new headquarters buildings for Lloyds of London (1979-85) and
the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank (completed in 1986) in Hong Kong. Arup also
continued to work with Renzo Piano on numerous projects, including the Menil Gallery
(1984) and Kansai International Airport (1988-94).

Arup advocated a way of working that not only brought together many of the
disciplines to generate ideas at the beginning of the design process but that also created
multidisciplinary teams that directed projects through to completion. Many other
significant engineers emerged from the practice, including Jack Zunz, Ted Happold, Tom
Barker, Peter Rice, Jane Wernick, Chris Wise, and Cecil Balmond.

Arup received the Royal Gold Medal for Architecture in 1966 and in 1971 was
knighted by the queen of England for his services to architecture and engineering. His
inspiration created a practice that has been central to the development of outstanding
architecture and structural design worldwide. He remained actively involved in practice
until his death in 1988.

BRIAN CARTER
Kansai International Airport Terminal, Osaka; Lubetkin and Tecton
(Great Britain); Piano, Renzo (Italy); Rogers, Richard (Great Britain);

Smithson, Peter and Alison (Great Britain); Sydney Opera House

Biography

Born in Newcastle upon Tyne, England, to Danish parents, 16 April 1895. Studied
philosophy and mathematics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark; bachelor of arts 1916;
studied civil engineering, Royal Technical College, Copenhagen 1916-22; bachelor of
science 1922. Married Ruth Sorenson 1925:3 children. Designer 1922-25, chief designer
1925-34, Christiani and Nielsen, Hamburg, Germany; chief designer, J.L.Kier and
Company, London 1934-38. Director, Arup Designers Ltd., London and Arup and Arup
Ltd. with cousin 1938-46; consultant engineer to the Air Ministry, London 1938-45;
private practice as engineering consultant, London 1946-49; senior partner, Ove Arup

and Partners, London from 1949; senior partner, Arup Associates, London from 1963.
Visiting lecturer, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1955; Alfred Bossom
Lecturer, Royal Society of Arts, London 1970. Founding member, MARS (Modern
Architecture Research Group), London 1933; fellow, Institute of Structural Engineers
1940; fellow, Institute of Civil Engineers 1951; chairman, Society of Danish Civil
Engineers in Great Britain and Ireland 1955-59; fellow, American Concrete Institute
1975. Commander, Order of the British Empire 1953; Gold Medal, Royal Institute of
British Architects 1966; Knight Bachelor 1971; Chevalier 1965, Commander 1975, Order
of the Dannebrog, Denmark; Aga Khan Award for Architecture 1980. Died in London,
England, 2 February 1988.

Selected Works

Gorilla House, London Zoo, 1933
Penguin Pool, London Zoo, 1934
Highpoint I Apartment Building, Highgate, London, 1936
Brynmawr Rubber Company Factory, Gwent, Wales (with Architects Co-Partnership),
1952
Bus Station, Dublin, 1952
Hunstanton School, London, 1954
Kingsgate Footbridge, Durham, England, 1963
Sydney Opera House (first prize, 1957 competition; with Jorn Utzon), 1973
Garden Pavilion, Mannheim, Germany (with Frei Otto), 1975
Centre Georges Pompidou (first prize, 1971 competition; with Renzo Piano and Richard
Rogers), Paris, 1977
Finsbury Avenue Offices, London, 1984
Menil Gallery, Houston (with Piano), 1984
Lloyds of London Headquarters (first prize, 1978 competition; with Rogers), London,
1985
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank (first prize, 1980 competition; with Norman Foster),
Hong Kong, 1986
Kansai International Airport, Osaka (with Piano), 1994

Selected Publications
1939
1940
1941
1986

Further Reading

Arup, Ove, London: Institution of Civil Engineers, 1995

Dunster, David (editor), | London: Ernst and Sohn, 1996
Rice, Peter, | London: Artemis, 1994; 2nd edition, London: Ellipsis, 1996
Silver, Nathan, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1994
Sommer, Degenhard, Herbert Stécher, and Lutz Weisser, Basel and Boston:
Birkhauser Verlag, 1994

ASHBEE, C.R. 1863-1942

Architect, England

C.R.Ashbee was one of the best-known figures of the British Arts and Crafts
movement. He was born on 17 May 1863 in Spring Grove, Isleworth, on the western
fringe of London. Ashbee attended Wellington College from 1877 to 1882 and graduated
from King’s College, Cambridge, in 1886. At King’s College, Ashbee became exposed to
the thoughts of Ruskin, which were to influence his lifelong commitment to the Arts and
Crafts. Among Ashbee’s noteworthy accomplishments were the founding of the Guild of
Handicraft; a series of houses on Cheyne Walk, London; the development of the Survey
of London; and his role as civic adviser to the city of Jerusalem during renovations to the
old city.

Following King’s College, Ashbee joined the architectural firm of Bodley and Garner,
the leading English church architects of their day. For the next two years, Ashbee lived at
Toynbee Hall, meeting William Morris for the first time on 4 January 1886. Ashbee drew
on his experiences at Toynbee Hall in founding his own School and Guild of Handicraft,
inaugurated on 23 January 1888. The School and Guild grew in part from Ashbee’s
reading class on Ruskin in the winter of 1896-97 and a later class on drawing and
decoration (both at Toynbee Hall). Ashbee rented for two years the top floor of a
warehouse on Commercial Street, which served as a combined workshop and
schoolroom. The primary goal of the School and Guild, observed Ashbee, was “the
application of Art to Industry” (Burrough, 1969, p. 85). The School lasted only until
895, but the Guild (which produced furniture, silver and metalwork, jewelry, and later,
books) was Ashbee’s constant focus until it began to decline in 1905. Shortly after its
inauguration, the Guild’s work was favorably received at the first exhibition of the Fine
Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society in September 1888. After William Morris’s death in
896, the Guild purchased and operated his Kelmscott Press. For most of his career,
Ashbee maintained an architectural office as well as the Guild of Handicraft. His first
architectural office opened in September 1890 at 15 Lincoln’s End Fields, London. Soon
the volume of work required a larger space, and the firm moved to Essex House on Mile
End Road in 1891.

A major undertaking of Ashbee’s career was the large-scale movement of the Guild of
Handicraft, its workers, and their families to Chipping Campden in the Gloucestershire
countryside in 1902. Inspired by Ruskin’s 1882 explanation of his St. George’s Guild,
focusing on the value of rural life, work, and community, Ashbee and his Guild
renovated buildings in the small rural town for their purposes. Chief among the renovated
buildings was the old Silk Mill (1902, woodshed and engine house; 1909, pottery kilns),


which became the center of the Chipping Campden site. By 1905, however, the Guild
was in decline. Its distance from London made marketing its wares more difficult, and
competitors, such as Liberty, began to produce comparatively inexpensive copies of its
silver work. The dismal economic times and remote location of the Guild made letting
workers go an impractical solution to these problems. Instead, the Guild began to
liquidate its assets in 1907. Despite the Guild’s eventual demise, it served as a model for
other socially conscious projects, such as Jane Addams’s Hull House in Chicago.

In addition to his work with the Guild, Ashbee designed, built, and
renovated many houses, including several on Cheyne Walk, London,
where his work is perhaps best known. He combined the ambiance of old
London, brickwork, and an asymmetrical arrangement of elements to
produce simple and functional houses appropriate for their riverside
setting. In 1893 Ashbee began work on the first house—The Ancient
Magpie and Stump at 37 Cheyne Walk—which became his mother’s
house and was Ashbee’s first executed design. He then bought land that he

38 Cheyne Walk, London, designed by C.R.Ashbee (1898-99)
© Philippa Lewis, Edifice/CORBIS

was interested in developing, designed houses for the land, and showed the homes to
friends, colleagues, and real estate agents to attract a clientele. Ashbee created drawings
for 21 sites, often designing multiple schemes simultaneously. Other homes in the area
with which Ashbee was involved as architect or renovator were 24 Cheyne Row (1895)
and the following structures on Cheyne Walk: 72-73 (1896-97), 118-119 (1897-98), 74
(1897-98), 38-39 (1898-99), and 75 (1901-02). Of these houses, only 38-39 survives.

Ashbee also made significant contributions to architecture and the study of its history
through two additional projects. In 1894 he began work on the Survey of London, one of
his most enduring legacies to English architectural history. The aim of this ambitious
project was to record all historic buildings in London. Today, the Survey of London is a
continuing and scholarly record. Following the Guild’s demise, Ashbee was appointed
civic adviser to the city of Jerusalem to survey the old city and to begin the restoration
process. Ashbee worked on the restoration of Jerusalem between 1919 and 1922, when he
resigned and retired to Godden Green, Kent.

In addition to his architectural and crafts pursuits, Ashbee traveled and lectured
extensively in the United States in 1896 and 1900-01 (the East and Midwest) and in
1908-09 (California), visiting some 14 states on his coast-to-coast tour. Some time in late
November or early December 1900, Ashbee met Frank Lloyd Wright, with whom he was
to keep up a lifelong correspondence and friendship. During his 1909 visit to California,
Ashbee met Charles Sumner Greene and was impressed by the architectural and furniture
work of the firm, which was just completing work on the Blacker and Gamble Houses in
Pasadena, California.

Ashbee died on 23 May 1942. His multidimensional life had been dedicated to his
belief that “the things which made for good craftsmanship were in the end neither
technical nor aesthetic, but moral and social” (Crawford, 1985, p. 213).

CYNTHIA DUQUETTE SMITH
Arts and Crafts Movement; Greene, Henry M. and Charles S. (United

States); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

The most comprehensive and authoritative examination of Ashbee’s life and work is
provided by Crawford (1985). MacCarthy (1981) focuses on the social aspects of
Ashbee’s family and Guild life and the movement of the Guild to the Cotswolds.
Burrough’s (1969) two-part article in offers a thorough overview of the Guild’s history
carrer. and handicrafts, but less focus on the architectural aspects of Ashbee’s

Burrough, B.G., “Three Disciples of William Morris: 2 Charles Robert Ashbee, Part 1,”

171 (October 1969)
Burrough, B.G., “Three Disciples of William Morris: 2 Charles Robert Ashbee, Part 1,”
171 (December 1969)

Crawford, Alan, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1985
Crawford, Alan, “Ten Letters from Frank Lloyd Wright to Charles Robert Ashbee” — 13
(1970)

MacCarthy, Fiona, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981

Winter, Robert W., “American Sheaves from ‘C.R.A.’ and Janet Ashbee,” 30
(December 1971)

ASPLUND, ERIK GUNNAR 1885-1940

Architect, Sweden

Erik Gunnar Asplund was among the most important Scandinavian architects of the
first half of the 20th century. His early work evolved from National Romanticism through
the sparse Nordic classicism of the World War I period and by 1930 embraced canonic
modernism. At the time of his death in 1940, his work assumed a personal direction,
influenced more by traditional architecture and a desire for symbolic content than by
contemporaneous design tenets. Asplund had a unique ability to create a sense of place in
his architecture, to manifest directly the context in which his works were situated through
manipulating landscape elements as forcefully as architectural ones. His untimely death
at age 55 occurred at the height of his creative powers and productivity.

Born in Stockholm, Asplund studied architecture at the Royal Institute of Technology.
After traveling to Germany on an Institute Scholarship, he returned to Stockholm and
helped establish, with some fellow students, the Klara School, an independent academy
of design. Supplanting the more normative neoclassical training of the period, the Klara
School, under the tutelage of Carl Bergsten, Ragnar Osberg, Ivar Tengbom, and Carl
Westman, proposed a Romantic sensibility incorporating the influence of Scandinavian
vernacular design and handicrafts. The inclusion of vernacular and traditional sources of
expression had influenced Nordic architecture since the turn of the century, creating a
style known as National Romanticism. The National Romantic influences of Westman
and Osberg, and especially Osberg’s ability to combine symmetrical facade composition
with informal plan organization, informed Asplund’s early work: examples include the
villa project for Ivar Asplund (1911), the Karlshamn School competition entry (1912),
and the Villa Ruth (1914). These works are characterized by a vernacular imagery created
through using traditional board and batten siding, tilecovered gable-roof forms, and
carefully placed and proportioned window openings.

Asplund, while continuing to use vernacular imagery, began to use
classical motifs in his work, as witnessed in the first-place competition
entry for the Woodland Cemetery (1915, Stockholm; in collaboration with
Sigurd Lewerentz) and his Woodland Chapel (1919, Stockholm), which
blends Romanticism and Classicism. The simple, steeply pitched chapel
roof recalls Swedish vernacular buildings, whereas the austere Doric
portico, domed interior space, and white-rendered stucco walls reference
classicism. The Villa Snellman (1918), located in Djursholm, a Stockholm
suburb, continues Asplund’s dialogue between classicism and

Romanticism, as does the Lister County Courthouse (1921, Sélvesborg).

In the Courthouse, however, the detail qualities of the building become
somewhat idiosyncratic, even exaggerated, in execution. Three
competition entries for urban projects entered during the period 1917-
22—the Géta Square (1917) and the Gustaf Adolf Square (1918), both in
Géteborg, and the Royal Chancellery (1922) in Stockholm—indicate that

Woodland Chapel, Stockholm, Sweden, designed by Erik Gunnar
Asplund (1919)
© Earl Moursund/GreatBuildings.com

Asplund’s sensitivity in designing buildings within the historical context of the city is
equal to that within the natural landscape.

Paralleling the development of classicism in Scandinavia during the 1920s, the
classical-Romantic duality of Asplund’s earlier work gave way to a more explicit
expression of classical principles. The work of this period represents a serious attempt at
innovation within the context of classicism rather than a nascent eclecticism. Two
buildings in Stockholm, the Skandia Cinema (1923) and the Public Library (1928),
demonstrated his leadership position in this pan-Nordic movement. Whereas the Skandia
Cinema projects a certain playful and idiosyncratic use of classical elements, motifs, and
images, the Public Library has a simplicity and austerity reminiscent of the neoclassical
architecture of the French Enlightenment. Although the initial design for the library was
explicitly classical, with coffered dome, columnar entry porticos, and -like facade
treatment, the built work, while maintaining the organizational was abstracted into two
simple volumetric elements: cube and cylinder. Preceded by a large reflecting pool, the
building sits slightly rotated in its parklike setting, further enhancing the monumentality
of the austere volumes. The cylinder houses a great rotunda, which contains the tiered,
open-stack lending hall. It is a monumental clerestoried space that recalls the work of the
French 18th-century architect Etienne-Louis Boullée. Exterior and interior surfaces are

rendered in stucco, with finely proportioned openings and excellently crafted and
integrated sculptural detail that provide the building with a subtle power.

The Stockholm Public Library marks the end of Nordic classicism, for
“functionalism,” as modernism was termed in Scandinavia, had appeared in Sweden.
Asplund’s 1930 Stockholm Exhibition celebrated the emergence of functionalism in
Sweden and represented a fundamental change in sensibility for the architect. The design
for the Exhibition complex underwent three phases, the last occurring after Asplund
traveled to the Continent to visit extant examples of the new “modern” architecture. The
Stockholm Exhibition not only epitomized the mechanistic aesthetics of modernism but
also served as a propaganda instrument for illustrating its social programs. However,
unlike many modernist compositions that were isolated objects sitting in green, parklike
settings, Asplund’s complex assumed a more dense, urban configuration. The light,
machinelike pavilions were tied together by such traditional urban elements as squares,
concourses, cul-de-sacs, and garden courtyards. Here, space was as important as form.
The tall, constructivist-inspired advertising mast was a light, steel structure that held
signs and flags and provided a festive and energetic quality to the Exhibition.

Although Asplund’s Bredenberg Department Store (1935, Stockholm) was

a functionalist work, the State Bacteriological

Woodland Chapel, Stockholm, Sweden, interior, designed by Eric
Gunnar Asplund (1919)
© Earl Moursund/GreatBuildings.com

Laboratories (1937, Stockholm) signaled a move away from the canons of modernism. In
his last two major commissions, the Géteborg Law Courts Annex (won in competition in
1913, redesigned in 1925, and completed in 1936) and the Woodland Crematorium
(1940), Asplund’s reaction to functionalism solidified. The addition to the Law Courts,
which were designed by Nicodemus Tessin in 1672, was initially conceived of as a direct

extension of the original facade. In the final design, Asplund attempted the difficult
proposition of developing a facade that would create a contrasting yet harmonizing
tension between the old and the new. The result extends the rhythm of the original facade
with a modern vocabulary while containing classical inferences. The central interior
atrium, composed of a delicate concrete framework and staircases and superbly detailed
wood paneling, has a timeless quality that transcends stylistic preferences.

Asplund’s final major work, the Woodland Crematorium, is a composition dominated
by the manipulation of the naturalistic qualities of the landscape, making the buildings
seem secondary on approach. Yet the positioning of the primary architectural elements of
loggia, wall, and cross actively gathers the surrounding landscape into a dynamic,
emotional experience. The complex contains references to traditional, classical, and
modern architecture: the planar quality of the buildings stems from modernism and the
loggia and from classical sources, whereas the material usage and landscape design root
the building to its Nordic context. The integration that Asplund achieved in the complex
through the synthesis of modern with classical and vernacular precedents makes the
Woodland Crematorium, in the final analysis, one of the truly compelling buildings of the
20th century.

WILLIAM C.MILLER
Classicism; Stockholm Public Library; Stockholm, Sweden

Biography

Born in Stockholm, Sweden, 22 September 1885. Studied architecture at the Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm 1905-09; attended the Klara Academy of
Architecture under Carl Bergsten, Ivar Tengbom, Carl Westman, and Ragnar Osberg
1910-11; studied the architecture of Italy and Greece 1913-14. Married (1) Gerda
Sellman (divorced); married (2) Ingrid Katarina Kling 1934. Worked for I.G.Clason,
Stockholm 1910-11; private practice, Stockholm 1911-40; editor, magazine,
Stockholm 1917-20. Founded the Klara Academy with six others, including Sigurd
Lewerentz and Osvald Almquist 1910; assistant lecturer, Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm 1912-13; special instructor in ornamental art, Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm 1917-18; professor of architecture, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm
1931-40. Died in Stockholm, Sweden, 20 October 1940.

Selected Works

Villa Project for Ivar Asplund, Sweden, 1911

Villa Ruth, Kuusankoski, Finland, 1914

Woodland Cemetery (with Sigurd Lewerentz; first place, competition), Stockholm,
1915

Géta Square (competition project), Géteborg, Sweden, 1917

Gustaf Adolf Square (competition project), Géteborg, Sweden, 1918

Karlshaam Secondary School, Sweden, 1918

Villa Snellman, Djursholm, Sweden, 1918

Woodland Chapel, Stockholm, 1919

Lister County Courthouse, Sdlvesborg, Sweden, 1921

Royal Chancellery (competition entry), Stockholm, 1922

Skandia Cinema, Stockholm, 1923

Public Library, Stockholm, 1928

Stockholm Exhibition, 1930

Bredenburg Department Store, Stockholm, 1935

Géteborg Law Courts Annex (won in competition 1913; redesigned 1925), 1936
State Bacteriological Labs, Stockholm, 1937

Woodland Crematorium, Stockholm, 1940

Selected Publication

(with W.Gahn, S.Markelius, G.Paulsson, E.Sundahl, and U.Ahrén), 1931

Further Reading

Interest in Asplund’s work has increased over the last quarter-century, as architects look
to designers who were able to synthesize, during the late 1930s, a number of competing
architectural traditions in a compelling and personal manner. This, coupled with
Asplund’s understanding of the interactive relationship between built elements and the
landscape and the creation of appropriate urban spaces, forms, and additions, has
stimulated more in-depth analysis of his work. This interest is witnessed by the number
of publications that have appeared on his work since 1980.
Alison, Filippo, Milan: Electa, 1985
Caldenby, Claes, and Olof Hultin (editors), Stockholm: Arkitektur Forlag, 1985; New
York: Rizzoli, 1986
Constant, Caroline, Stockholm: Byggforlaget, 1994
Cruickshank, Dan (editor), | London: Architect’s Journal, 1988
de Maré, Erik, London: Art and Technics, 1955
Engfors, Christina, Stockholm: Arkitektur Férlag, 1990; as Stockholm:
Arkitektur Férlag, 1990
Hasegawa, A., Tokyo: Space Design, 1982
Holmdahl, Gustaf, Sven Ivar Lind, and Kjell Odeen (editors), Stockholm:
Tidskriften Byggmastaren, 1943; as Stockholm: Tidskriften Byggmastaren, 1950;
2nd edition, Stockholm: Byggforlaget, 1981
Lindvall, Jéran (editor), © Stockholm: Arkitekturmuseet and Arkitektur Forlag, 1985
St. John Wilson, Colin (editor), London: Architectural Association, 1988
Wrede, Stuart, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1980
Zevi, Bruno, Milan: II Balcone, 1948

AT&T BUILDING

Designed by Philip Johnson; completed 1984 New York, New York

As arguably the first Postmodern building designed on a monumental, commercial
scale, the AT&T Building (completed in 1984 by Philip Johnson) generated sufficient
popular interest to be front-page news in the on 31 March 1978 and the cover story in
on 8 January 1979, which portrayed the architect Philip Johnson cradling a model of the
proposed design. In legitimizing Postmodern style and ideas, it reversed almost three
decades of modern principles espoused by Mies van der Rohe that Johnson himself had
practiced with the master in the Seagram Building (1958). Gone are the open plaza (the
externalization of universal space); the understated, monochromatic, almost mute metal-
and-glass curtain wall; and the nonconformist, neo-Baroque setback from the avenue.
Instead, Johnson’s building presses directly against the site line along the entire block of
Madison Avenue between East 55th and East 56th Streets and introduces a newer type of
urban amenity: a glass-canopied atrium with retail establishments. Several similarities to
the Seagram Building remain, however, in the deeply recessed ground-story lobbies,
overall floor plans, and steel construction. In fact, the plan is typical of postwar high-rise
office buildings, comprising a sizable service core of elevators, emergency stairwells, and
rest rooms, with resultant narrow office spaces.

Discussions for the design began in the mid-1970s with AT&T, ironically one of the
world’s largest corporations before its divestiture only shortly after the erection of the
building. At a cost of $200 million, the 648-foot-high, 37-story building dedicated ten of
its stories to its eponymous corporation, with the remaining rented as general office
floors.

Its two central Postmodern features are the selection of a masonry enclosure, a light
pink granite, and the addition of a crowning broken pediment. The latter feature fueled
the nickname the “Chippendale” skyscraper, presumably because of its association with
Thomas Chippendale’s highboy chest-on-chests rather than with its actual but much rarer
architectural source in 18th-century Georgian entrances. Because of the density of the
location, the pedestrian experiences the building at two scales: from the street, the
ground-level arcades, and from a considerable distance, the signature broken pediment.
Originally, the ground level of the tower comprised open arcades around
the small entrance lobby and service core. The unenclosed public space
beneath the tower, compared to an Egyptian hypostyle hall by one
historian, was intended to mitigate the intensive use of the site and to
repay the absence of setbacks in the tower. At the rear of the site, a glass-
canopied galleria in the spirit of Milan’s Galleria Vittorio Emanuele
(1867) contains a three-story row of shops. A quarter of a barrel vault, the

canopy is supported by quarter-round arches, not un-

Top of the AT&T Building showing Chippendale detail, designed by
Phillip Johnson and John Burgee (1984)
© Mary Ann Sullivan

like the Romanesque tunnel-vaulted nave of St.-Sernin (1100) in Toulouse, France.
Concentric diamond and chevron patterns animate the granite floors. In 1994 Gwathmey
Siegel and Associates, in an effort to respond to criticism of insufficiently sheltered
public spaces, enclosed both the public arcades beneath the tower and the galleria, which
was extended into one bay on either side of the elevator core. By creating deep shadows,
Gwathmey Siegel’s bay windows for storefronts retain the feeling of depth in the arcade
openings.

The most tactile experience occurs at the street level, where the flame-finished pale
pink Stony Creek granite cladding meets the ground. Above substantial square column
bases rise piers with reentrant corners, and quarter pyramids mark this articulation.
Johnson has claimed that the entrance composition, with its central arch flanked by
narrower trabeated openings, recalled Filippo Brunelleschi’s Pazzi Chapel (1429) at
Santa Croce, Florence, although critics did not hold both in equal esteem. Following the
rhythm of openings established at the ground level, uninterrupted vertical bays contain
granite mullions between piers, anchored underneath to steel tubes and originally
intended to be round sectioned. Cost containment prevented the materialization of this

feature, and in combination with the insufficient suppression of windows into the wall,
AT&T’s resultant thinness has been a frequent source of criticism, which compared the
building unfavorably with Louis Sullivan’s Wainwright Building (1891) in St. Louis,
Missouri, admired for the expressive qualities of its brick masonry and molded terra-
cotta. More successful, however, are the upper-level executive floors, where deeper
suppression of the glazing and round-sectioned mullions were realized. Also lamented
were the bare expanses of granite between the entrance arcade and the office floors as
well as between the upper-level executive office floors and the sloping edges of the
pediment, the subtle cornice of which, however, was praised.

At the main entrance, a suppressed glazed entrance arch, with an oculus
above, echoes the narrow 116-foot central arch. Lavish detailing of the
material includes a diamond pattern, or in the apron around the openings
and fully threedimensional articulated moldings around the arch and in
corners. Capped with a gilded cross vault that springs from corner
brackets, the compact but well-proportioned 65-foot-tall lobby has a
black-and-white marble floor pattern recalling Durbar Hall (1931) at the
Viceroy’s House in New Delhi, India, designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens.
Lined with granite walls as well, the lobby precedes a barrel-vaulted
elevator hall; columns with abstracted Byzantine capitals demarcate the
two spaces. Among the renovations supervised by Gwathmey Siegel and
Associates, black glass replaced the diamond-patterned granite in the blind
lobby arches. Bronze elevator doors, set in a blind arcade, repeat the
arched forms. The regilded sculpture (1916), by Evelyn Beatrice
Longman, known popularly as_ from the top of the earlier headquarters,
was replaced, after the Sony Corporation purchased the building, by an

untitled nonobjective Joel Shapiro (1941-) sculpture.

Called the “sky lobby,” the main reception area sits one level above ground behind the
entrance oculus. Its veined Breccia Strazzema marble forms a central aedicule enclosed
by halfround arches springing from linteled openings. Gwathmey Siegel and Associates
softened surfaces with wood panels, black glass, and murals. In the middle section of the
building, there are 27 standard office floors, with ten-foot heights, and the executive
offices occupy the 33rd and 34th floors. In them, Johnson specified molded wood panels
and a double grand staircase connecting the two levels. Ventilation is diffused between
vinyl-clad metal acoustical ceiling panels, and task lighting illuminates each workstation.

Considered flamboyant and arbitrary by some, frivolous and stylistically promiscuous
by others, the building design generated ample criticism. Its historical references, reduced
to two dimensions, were said to lack symbolic weight. Still, in its superficial use of the
grammar of architecture, the AT&T Building expresses a perhaps unconscious camp
quality, and as an object of the resentment of Postmodernism for its esoteric references
and ad hoc assembly of historical images, AT&T represents at the same time the
overthrow of orthodox modernism.

PAUL GLASSMAN

Gwathmey, Charles, and Robert Siegel (United States); Mies van der
Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Postmodernism; Sullivan, Louis (United
States)

Further Reading

Periodical literature published when the building was completed provides the strongest
analyses and most insightful critical responses.
Banham, Reyner, “AT&T Offices, New York: The Post-Déco Skyscraper,” 176
(August 1984)

Canty, Donald, “AT&T: The Tower, the Skyline, and the Street,” 74 (February 1985)
Curtis, William J.R., “Modern Transformation of Classicism,” 176 (August 1984)
Doubilet, Susan, “Not Enough Said: AT&T Headquarters, New York, N.Y.,” 65
(February 1984)

Frampton, Kenneth (editor), (exhib. cat.), New York: Institute for Architecture
and Urban Studies, 1978
Goldberger, Paul, “A Monument to Post-Modernism,” (31 March 1978)
Hughes, Robert, “Doing Their Own Thing,” (8 January 1979)

Huxtable, Ada Louise, “Johnson’s Latest—Clever Tricks or True Art?” (16 April
1978)

“John Burgee Architects with Philip Johnson: AT&T Headquarters, New York, New
York ground breaking: January 1979; completion: 1984,” 12 (January 1985)
Knight, Carleton, “Significant Clients: Ma Bell Builds Big,” 72 (July 1983)
New York: Rizzoli, 1985; revised edition, 1989

Schulze, Franz, New York: Knopf, 1994

ATHENS CHARTER (1943)

The “Athens Charter” was the name given by Le Corbusier to his version of the results of
the fourth congress (1933) of the Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne
(CIAM). This congress was organized on the theme of the “Functional City,” a concept
developed in part by the Dutch town planner Cornelis van Eesteren, who became
president of CLAM in 1930. In contrast to what he called the “cardboard architecture” of
classical urbanism, van Eesteren and other CLAM members advocated an approach to city
planning based on the most rational siting of functional elements, such as workplaces and
transportation centers. This idea was linked to the belief that city planning should be
based on the creation of separate zones for each of the “four functions” of dwelling,
work, recreation, and transportation. At the fourth congress, held on a cruise ship
traveling from Marseilles to Athens and back in July-August 1933, CIAM members from
Eastern and Western Europe analyzed the samescale plans of 33 existing cities prepared
by CIAM members according to guidelines developed by the Dutch CIAM group. At the

end of the congress, the CLAM members present had planned to draw conclusions from
these analyses and to issue resolutions about how cities should be reorganized according
to CIAM principles. Disagreements over whether CLAM should call for the expropriation
of existing property for such a reorganization and over Le Corbusier and others’
promotion of high-rise housing delayed the issuing of these resolutions. In the fall of
1933, the congress instead published what it termed preliminary (Observations) in
French and (Findings) in German.

In both the French and the German versions, which were not completely consistent
with each other, the text emphasized that cities are part of an economic, social, and
political system. Under “Dwelling,” CLAM found that population densities were typically
too high in historic centers and that open spaces were lacking. It demanded that housing
districts should occupy the best sites and that a minimum amount of solar exposure
should be required in all dwellings. For hygienic reasons, CIAM asserted that buildings
should not be built along transportation routes and that modern techniques should be used
to construct high apartment buildings widely spaced apart to free the soil for large green
parks. Under “Leisure,” CIAM found that existing open areas were generally insufficient
for recreation or not well situated to benefit the inhabitants of dense central areas. It
called for the demolition of these central areas so that they could be turned into green
spaces, with schools and other collective facilities sited in them. Under “Work,” CLAM
found that the relationship between dwelling and places of work was not rational, as it
usually required long commutes. It determined that travel distances should be reduced to
a minimum and called for the separation of industrial quarters from housing, buffered by
a neutral zone of green areas and sports fields.

Under “Transportation,” CIAM found that most cities had street patterns that had
become unsuitable for modern means of transportation, such as streetcars and
automobiles. It proposed that rigorous statistical methods be used to establish rational
street widths, classified according to the speed of different modes of transport. Under
“Historic Districts of the City,’ CIAM stated that historic monuments should be
respected when they “are a pure expression of previous cultures and are of general
interest” and when their conservation did not mean that their inhabitants had to live in
unhealthy conditions.

In the CIAM concluded that the chaotic conditions of present cities do not
correspond to the “primordial bio-logical and psychological necessities of the
population.” It declared that the city should be organized according to the four functions
and that city plans should conform with these biological and psychological needs. CLAM
also emphasized that urbanism was “a three-dimensional science” and that the “element
of height” could be used to solve traffic problems and efficiently create green spaces for
leisure.

Le Corbusier’s published in Paris in 1943, is an expanded version of the that was
published in various European journals in 1933 and later. Le Corbusier began to call the
results of the fourth congress “La charte d’Athénes” in his “Pavilion des Temps
Nouveaux” at the 1937 Paris Exposition. In 1941, while serving on an urbanism
commission of the Nazi-controlled Vichy government, he began to prepare a new
publication of the By November 1941, as Vichy officials grew increasingly hostile to
him, he decided to publish the Athens Charter anonymously. He also established a new
French CIAM group, ASCORAL (Assemblée de Constructeurs pour une Renovation


Architecturale), which began to issue a series of publications on urbanism in anticipation
of postwar reconstruction. One of these publications, authored by “CIAM-France” (later
Le Corbusier), was
Although the book was based on the _ issued after the fourth congress, the immediate
inspiration for it had been Le Corbusier’s involvement with the reconstruction committee
in Vichy, where it was intended to provide a basis for legislation governing postwar
reconstruction. By publishing it with its 1941 introduction by Jean Giraudoux, the book
linked Le Corbusier and ASCORAL to the pre-Vichy era and paved the way for its
acceptance by the government after liberation. Although the text maintains the same
sectional headings (the four functions and the “Historic Districts of the City”) as the
original 1933 much new material was added, and existing points were significantly
modified. For example, the first point on the city in the original text is expanded into an
eight-point section called “The City and Its Region” in the Athens Charter, and what had
been simply termed “Summing Up” is retitled the more directive “Points of Doctrine.”
Without Le Corbusier and his associates’ urban plans, which are the text’s absent
illustrations, the Athens Charter is less clear than the terse 1933 CIAM and it often
reads as a series of platitudes. Nevertheless, it was widely referred to in postwar Europe
as the key text of the urbanism of the Modern movement. Later, it became the focus of
much of the Postmodernist reaction against this brand of urbanism.
ERIC MUMFORD

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France)

Further Reading

CIAM, “Constatations du [Ve Congrés,” (November 1933); as “Statements of the
Athens Congress, 1933,” in by Auke van der Woud, Delft, Netherlands:
Delft University Press, 1983
CIAM-France, Paris: Plon, 1943; as — by Le Corbusier, translated by Anthony
Eardley, New York: Grossman, 1973
Goldfinger, Erné, “A Meeting of the Minds,” 14 (December 1983)
Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo, (videorecording), New York: Windsor Video, 1986
Mumford, Eric, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2000
Sert, José Luis, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, and
London: Milford and Oxford University Press, 1942

AULENTI, GAE 1927-

Architect, Italy

Gae Aulenti is one of Italy’s best-known architects and one of the leading female
architects in the world. She has made her reputation in a versatile career that has
combined architecture with designs for theater, furniture, museums, exhibitions,

showrooms, gardens, and city-planning projects. In this way, she is very much a product
of Milan in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, when many architects, such as Vittorio Gregotti,
combined architecture with design.

Aulenti graduated from the Faculty of Architecture at the Milan Polytechnic
University in 1954. From 1955 to 1965, she was an editor in charge of layout at
magazine in Milan, directed by Ernesto Rogers, her mentor. She was a member of a
group of disciples of Rogers that included Vittorio Gregotti and Aldo Rossi, both of
whom also were editors at Her career as an architect began with a series of designs for
showrooms: Olivetti (1967) in Paris; Olivetti (1968) in Buenos Aires; Knoll International
(1970) in New York; and Fiat (1970) in Brussels, Zurich, and Turin. She also designed
offices, such as Max Mara (1965) in Milan. She designed a traveling exhibition (1970)
for Olivetti and participated in the exhibition, “Italy: The New Domestic Landscape,” at
the Museum of Modern Art in New York (1972). In the 1960s, her interior designs are
kaleidoscopic explosions of forms into space, though later they become calm and
restrained, with curvilinear, surreal, and suggestive forms. The early showrooms are
experiments in the breaking up of space without interfering with its functional use.

During the 1980s, Aulenti’s attention turned toward the design of museums and
exhibition spaces. Her best-known project is the design of the Musée d’Orsay (1980-86)
in Paris, made in collaboration with a team of French architects and the lighting designer
Piero Castiglioni. This beautiful museum combines the iron structure and stucco
decoration of a railway station into a modern architectural composition. Aulenti also
worked on exhibition spaces for the National Museum of Modern Art at the Georges
Pompidou Center in Paris (1982-85), the National Museum of Catalan Art in Barcelona
(1987-95), and the Palazzo Grassi in Venice (1985-93). She designed “The Italian
Metamorphosis 1943-68” exhibit at the Guggenheim Museum in New York (1994). The
museum and exhibition designs always take into account, according to Aulenti, how the
art is viewed by the visitor from different perspectives and combinations. Her exhibitions
develop contrasts between open and closed spaces as well as between the autonomy and
integration of spaces.

Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Aulenti designed a series of stage sets for theatrical
productions. These include sets for Rossini’s (1981-89), Rimski-Korsakov’s at the
Teatro alla Scala in Milan (1988), Strauss’s in Milan (1994), and Shakespeare’s at the
Teatro Argentina in Rome (1995). Aulenti’s stage sets contain beautiful dreamlike
imagery that juxtaposes color and evocative forms that transgress the rules of perspectival
construction. Aulenti sees the theater as a space of continuous transformation, where a
relation between time and space is enacted.

Museé d’Orsay, Paris, France, designed by Gae Aulenti (1986)
© Michael S.Lewis/CORBIS

During the 1990s, Aulenti received several commissions for residences and public
buildings. The residences include a villa (1990) at Saint-Tropez, where four autonomous
cubic structures are arranged on a square plan and connected in various ways, opening
between interior and exterior. The public commissions include the entranceway to a train
station in Florence, a college in Biella, and the Italian Pavilion at Expo ‘92 in Seville. At
the Italian Pavilion, Aulenti emulates Mies van der Rohe in the aesthetic refinement and
use of materials. Aulenti’s architecture always combines the application of an aesthetic
order and the synthetic analysis of space. The designs take into account how space is
experienced and how spaces and masses are combined. She experiments with relations
among materials, distances, measurements, and equilibriums: primarily concerning how
the body is experienced in the space.

In Italy, Aulenti’s work has been the subject of important critical essays by Emesto
Rogers, Vittorio Gregotti, Aldo Rossi, Manfredo Tafuri, and Francesco Dal Co. Although
she is Italy’s most famous woman architect, Aulenti’s work has had very little influence
on architectural practice in Italy and no theoretical influence in the architecture schools,
as opposed to her peers Vittorio Gregotti and Aldo Rossi.

JOHN HENDRIX
Gregotti, Vittorio (Italy); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany);

Museum of Modern Art, New York; Rossi, Aldo (Italy)

Biography

Born in Palazzolo dello Stella, Italy, 4 December 1927. Graduated from the School of
Architecture, Milan Polytechnic 1954. In private practice, Milan from 1954; exhibition
and industrial designer since 1954; member, editorial staff, | Milan 1955-65; member,

board of directors, Venice from 1974. Assistant professor of architec-tural
composition, faculty of architecture, University of Venice 1960-62; assistant professor of
the elements of architectural composition, faculty of architecture, Milan Polytechnic
1964-67; visiting lecturer, the College of Architecture, Barcelona and the Cultural
Center, Stockholm 1969-75. Member, Movimenti Studi per 1’Architettura, Milan 1955—
61; member, from 1960, vice president, 1966, Associazione per il Disegno Industriale,
Milan; honorary member, Italian National Society of Interior Designers 1967; honorary
member, American Society of Interior Designers 1967; joint executive member, Milan
1977-80; corresponding member, Accademia Nazionale di San Luca, Rome from 1984;
honorary member, Bund Deutscher Architekten 1990; honorary fellow, American
Institute of Architects. Chevalier, Legion d’Honneur 1987; Commander, Ordre des Arts
et Lettres 1987.

Selected Works

Max Mara Office, Milan, 1965

Olivetti Showroom, Paris, 1967

Olivetti Showroom, Buenos Aires, 1968

Traveling Olivetti Exhibition, 1970

Knoll International Showroom, New York, 1970

Fiat Showroom, Brussels, Zurich, and Turin, 1970

National Museum of Modern Art, Exhibition Designs, Georges Pompidou Center,
Paris, 1985

Musée d’Orsay, Paris, 1986

Stage sets for Rossini’s 1989

Marina B Store, Milan, 1989

Villa at Saint-Tropez, 1990

Italian Pavilion, Expo °92, Seville, 1992

Palazzo Grassi, Venice, Restoration, 1993

“The Italian Metamorphosis 1943-68” Exhibition, Guggenheim Museum, New York,
1994

National Museum of Catalan Art, Exhibition Designs, Barcelona, 1995

Palazzo Grassi, Venice, Exhibition Designs, 1996

Selected Publications

(with others), 1973 (with Franco Quadri and Luca Ronconi), 1981

Further Reading

Bianchetti, Fabrizio, Faenza, Italy: C.E.L.L, 1991
(exhib. cat.), Milan: Electa, 1979
Galbiati, Augusta, Claudio Raboni, and Simonetta Rasponi, Milan: Etas, 1984

Petranzan, Margherita, Milan: Rizzoli, 1996; as translated by Susan Meadows, New
York: Rizzoli, 1997

AUSTRALIA

The 1901 federation of sovereign states and territories that formed the Commonwealth of
Australia centralized cultural developments. A new nationalism subdued regional
differences. A new federal capital, Canberra was chosen, as it was equidistant between
the cities of Melbourne and Sydney. These two metropolitan cities became the primary
settings for major 20th-century architectural movements, although many gems have been
built throughout the whole country: the modernist Education Department Building (1982,
Perth, Western Australia), by Cameron Chisholm and Nicol; Student Union Building,
University of Adelaide (1973, South Australia), by Dickson and Flatten; St Ann’s
Geriatric Hospital (1979, Hobart, Tasmania), by Heffernan Nation Rees and Viney;
Queensland Art Gallery (1982, Brisbane), by Robin Gibson and Partners; and the
contextual “Pee Wees at the Point” restaurant in tropical Darwin (1998, Northern
Territory), by Troppo Architects. The most beautifully crafted building in the nation is
the Postmodern Parliament House complex in Canberra (1988, Australian Capital
Territory), by the Italian-American Romaldo Giurgola (Mitchell Giurgola and Thorpe),
nowadays a resident of Canberra.

The architectural forms of the vast terminal buildings for the suburban electric railway
networks in Melbourne and Sydney were indicative of fin-de-siécle tension between Arts
and Crafts Movement principles and a shift to rational Classicism. The ornate Flinders
Street Station (1911, Melbourne), by J.W.Fawcett and H.P.C.Ashworth, was an
Edwardian Baroque masterpiece and emulated not only buildings in London but also
some in Otto Wagner’s Vienna. The entry on a diagonal to the street intersection has a
generous semicircular arched opening below a band of squat columns compressed
between a heavy lintel and sill, both being familiar tectonic elements in Henry
H.Richardson’s and Louis Sullivan’s Chicago of the 1880s. The sedate facade of the
Central Railway Station in Sydney (1908), by Walter Liberty Vernon, has a heavily
rusticated base in front of an austere neoclassical elevation.

Garden suburbs grew rapidly, starting early in the twentieth century. The detached
house in its own garden became the norm. The middle classes abandoned their 19th-
century innercity terrace houses, renting them to industrial workers of the inner belt of
factories and warehouses. Brick-walled and terracotta-roofed Federation Style bungalows
that amalgamated English and American Queen Anne traits dominated the new grids of
Melbourne’s tree-lined streets. Typically, the Arthur Norman house (1910, Kew), by
Ussher and Kemp, combined elements of Richard Norman Shaw’s English Domestic
Revival and the American Shingle Style and included the latter’s diagonal compositions
in plan and silhouette.

Exceptions in Melbourne were Robert Haddon’s Art Nouveau red brick Anselm
(1906, Caulfield) and Harold Desbrowe Annear’s half-timbered Chadwick House (1903,
Eaglemont), with inventive Arts and Crafts details and curved forms. In Sydney,


W.Hardy Wilson revived an elegant Regency colonial domestic architecture, Eryldene
(1913, Gordon), which has his famous Chinese garden pavilion. During the late teens and
the 1920s, architects led the way with the ubiquitous California bungalow-type homes in
the suburbs of both cities. The major central city buildings at this time were the
reinforced concrete Capitol House office block and the adjacent Capitol Theatre (1924,
Melbourne), with its crystalline plaster ceiling. This complex was designed by Walter
Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin, who had settled in Australia in 1914 to
achieve the realization of their 1911 competition-winning design for the city of Canberra.

After the Great Depression, the images of modernism were embraced in Australia in
the mid-1930s. Initially, the styling of the outer fabric of the suburban house was
affected, rather than its planning. Having visited the United States, Harry A.Norris
employed an expressive Jazz Moderne for the reinforced concrete house Burnham
Beeches (1933, Sassafras, Victoria). Roy Grounds, in designing Portland Lodge (1934,
Frankston, Victoria), showed fascination with the linear timber houses of William W.
Wurster of California. Having worked in England, Sydney Ancher, in the Prevost House
(1937, Bellevue Hill, New South Wales) incorporated the open living room idea and the
curved dining screen element found in Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s Tugendhat House
(1930, Brno, Czechoslovakia). Ancher’s younger office colleague in the post-World War
II years, Glenn Murcutt, took as his exemplar the Farnsworth House (1950) by Mies and
consequently created a vibrant series of climatecontrolled universal-box houses (1985,
Magney house, Bingy Point, New South Wales) that also reflect Alvar Aalto’s
involvement with materials and their potential for exquisite empathetic detailing.

In Melbourne’s central business district, Marcus Barlow in the Manchester Unity
office block (1932) displayed his enthusiasm for the work of Raymond Hood, for this
example providing a corner marker based on the Chicago Tribune Tower (1922), with
Chicago Gothic verticality in the two street elevations. Norman Seabrook in the
MacPherson Robertson Girls High School (1934, South Melbourne) gave testimony to a
pilgrimage often made by Australian architects to the Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired
Hilversum Town Hall (1931) by Willem Marinus Dudok of the Netherlands.

Despite the privations of World War II, a large, reinforced concrete block of flats of
great sculptural power, Stanhill (1950, Queens Road, Melbourne), by the Swiss-trained
architect Frederick Romberg, was eventually completed. The irregular plan and block
massing, reminiscent of the superstructure of an ocean liner, was composed of
International Style figures in an accomplished and idiosyncratic fashion. This compares
with the rationally simple indented crescent of “urban co-operative multi-home units” in
reinforced concrete (1951, Potts Point Sydney) by Aaron Bolot, a former employee of the
Griffins.

The estate of three family houses at Turramurra, on the out-skirts of Sydney, by the
Gropius- and Breuer-trained, Austrianborn Harry Seidler, reformed and consolidated
International Modernism in Australia. The Rose Seidler House (1950, Wahroonga) is
similar in plan to the American East Coast houses created by his teachers, and its
appearance also reflected De Stijl principles. However, Seidler imaginatively overlaid
aspects of Le Corbusier’s 1920s imagery, specifically, of the white cube thrust up on thin

the cube cut and sliced, and the ramp as an element of the architectural promenade.
Seidler, in his own house (1967, Killara), enriched the idea of circulation, and the forms
became robust and muscular in reinforced concrete.


Counter to Seidler’s international rationalism, Peter Muller, a University of
Pennsylvania graduate, and Bruce Rickard independently created site-sensitive houses
around Sydney that were largely based on the characteristics of the Usonian houses of
Frank Lloyd Wright. Muller composed Kumale (1956, Palm Beach) out of circles, and
Rickard formed Mirrabooka (1964, Castle Hill) of rectangles. Hoyts Cinema Centre
(1969, Bourke Street, Melbourne) was designed by Muller. Melbourne architects
Chancellor and Patrick also referred to American organic sensibilities, but in their former
ES&A Bank (1960, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne), the massive corner piers and vertical
concrete ribs were typical of the Griffins’s work, not Wright’s.

Daring use of tensile steel proved to be more feasible than fanciful shell concrete
conceptions for the Olympic Swimming Stadium (1956, Flinders Park Melbourne), by
Kevin Borland, Peter McIntyre, John and Phyllis Murphy (1982, Borland Brown
alterations), and the Sidney Myer Music Bowl (1959, Kings Domain, Melbourne), by
Yuncken Freeman Brothers Griffiths and Simpson (1999, Gregory Burgess
refurbishment). Inspired by expressionistic works by Eero Saarinen, Bruce Goff, and Paul
Rudolph, structural experiments and formal adventures by Melbourne architects in the
1950s were discerned as a “Melbourne School” by the prolific Melbourne commentator
and architect, Robin Boyd. In “The State of Australian Architecture” (1967), Boyd also
identified a “Sydney School” of “nutty crunchy textures,” referring to a disciplined but
picturesque firsthand interpretation of English Brutalism by architects such as Ken
Woolley. His own house (1962, Mosman) consisted of exposed timber-floor terrace
levels stepping down a heavily vegetated natural bush site, enclosed by klinker-brick
walls and terracotta Roman roof tiles.

Boyd was a staunch advocate for the Modern movement and used absolutes derived
from the writings of Walter Gropius to measure and criticize his contemporaries. He grew
to understand, however, that eclectic diversity was real. His The = (1965) reviewed the
plurality of theories and solutions in the world architectural scene. Sharing Gropius’s
belief that Japanese architecture of the 1960s fulfilled the dream of a universal modern
architecture possessing a regional flavor, Boyd wrote (1962) and (1968).

The Sydney Opera House commission, in an international competition judged by Eero
Saarinen, was won by the Danish architect Jorn Utzon (1957). He proposed free-form
layered roof shells, which proved to be structurally indeterminate. Utzon developed a
reinforced concrete ribbed structural system finished in curved white ceramic tiles, each
“shell” being a segment ofa sphere. Political maneuvering soon deprived Utzon of design
control, and he resigned in 1963. The interiors and glass walling were finished by Hall
Todd & Littlemore (1973).

Australian architects have built abroad, including Sydneytrained John Andrews. His
seminal Scarborough College (1965, Toronto, Canada), and Gund Hall, Graduate School
of Design (1968, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts) are like rigourous
zoning and circulation diagrams realized in elegantly detailed reinforced concrete and
glass. Another significant geometrically abstract work was Seidler’s Australian Embassy
in Paris (1977), dominated by two curved-in-counterpoint blocks of office suites. Ken
Woolley assembled relaxed reinforced concrete pavilion forms in a tropical garden in the
Australian Embassy, Bangkok, Thailand (1985, Ancher Mortlock Woolley). Embassy
architects from Melbourne have included strong architectural references to the host
countries. Daryl Jackson, for the Australian Chancery complex, Riyadh (1989, Saudi

Arabia), used grillwork-shaded courts and robust heavy walls. Denton Corker Marshall in
Beijing (1992, Peoples Republic of China) used as a theme Chinese courtyard houses,
with solid wall enclosures and large-scaled square openings. Their design for Tokyo
(1991) is a sparkling assembly of metal blockforms reflecting the vitality of new
Japanese architecture. Hank Koning and Julie Eizenberg from Melbourne successfully
practice in Los Angeles, California.

The dichotomy of geometric-abstract versus free-style modes still haunts Australian
architectural production. Giurgola, in the new parliament buildings in Canberra (1988),
integrated a classical severity and repose, with an “itinerary” of “fragments” embedded in
a hill. With the RMIT University Building #8 (constructed on top of a low-rise student
union building by John Andrews [1982]), Edmond and Corrigan (in association with
Demaine Partnership [1994]) introduced a variety of pop figures into the ground of
rectangular block wall facing the major Melbourne thoroughfare of Swanston Street.
Peter Corrigan studied at Yale University during the Charles Moore and Robert Venturi
era, enhancing his predilection for startling shapes and juxtapositions, polychromy, and
contrasting patterns. Next door is the restoration and additions for Storey Hall (1995,
former Hibernian Hall, RMITU) by Ashton Raggatt McDougall, which contributes
another masterpiece in the tradition of Melbourne expressionism. Pea-green and purple
paint was sprayed on the multifaceted raw concrete facade, to which a network of
castbronze computer-generated geometric figures was attached. These two buildings
contributed compatibly to the wall of the streetscape.

The values of craftmanship and organicism have also survived in current work by
architects in various cities. Rex Addison, in his own house (1999, Brisbane), freely
interprets the regional qualities of the typical timber and corrugated-iron 19th-century
tropical Queensland house. Richard Leplastrier in a house for the Australian novelist
Peter Carey (1982, Bellingen, New South Wales) provided an airy elevated timber
pavilion beside a native forest. Gregory Burgess lived on site with aboriginal people
before designing their Brambuk Cultural Centre (1990, Halls Gap, Victoria), a birdlike
undulating corrugated-iron roofscape supported on peeled tree-trunk poles in-filled with
timber-clad framing. Similarly, Gregory Burgess designed the aboriginal landowners’
information centre at Uluru (1998, Northern Territory), an icon for Australia at the end of
the millennium.

JEFF TURNBULL
Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Canberra, Australia; Gropius, Walter
(Germany); Melbourne, Australia; Plan of Canberra; Seidler, Harry
(Australia); Sydney, Australia; Sydney Opera House; Tugendhat House,
Brno, Czech Republic; Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States); Wurster,
William (United States)

Further Reading

Boyd, Robin, New York: Braziller, 1962
Boyd, Robin, — [Carlton, Australia]: Melbourne University Press and New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1965

Boyd, Robin, “The State of Australian Architecture,’ 56 (June 1967)

Boyd, Robin, Melbourne: University of Melbourne Press, 1952; Penguin Books,
1968
Boyd, Robin, New York: Braziller, 1968
Johnson, Donald Leslie, Sydney: University of Sydney Press, 1980

Taylor, Jennifer, Sydney: The Law Book Company, 1986

AUSTRIA

Despite enduring the disruption of two world wars and decades of political, social, and
economic turmoil, Austria has been among the most fertile centers of 20th-century
architecture. From Otto Wagner at the beginning of the century to Co-op Himmelb(1)au at
its end, Austrian architects have often been at the forefront of the struggle to confront the
rapidly changing dictates of the modern age. Those efforts have been marked less by
technical innovation than in many other countries—until recently Austria’s building
industries lagged behind those of most other European nations—but rather by a
remarkable openness to new forms and ideas. On the one hand, modern Austrian
architecture has been characterized by a strong inclination to embrace novelty, to
originate and develop innovative expressions. But Austrian architects have also exhibited
exceptional skill in manipulating and re-using elements from the past, engaging, in the
process, in a sophisticated dialogue with history. In the works of many of the best
Austrian architects, these two tendencies have been combined to yield designs of unusual
power and expressiveness. Often the results have been quite distinctive: the works of
figures like Adolf Loos or Gustav Peich! remain uniquely individual and parochial, even
while they have drawn worldwide attention. And when Austrian architects have followed
wider tendencies, their works nonetheless frequently show original adaptations to culture
and place.

The origins of 20th-century Austrian architecture stem in great part from Otto Wagner.
In his roles as practitioner, revolutionary, and teacher, Wagner inaugurated the headlong
search for the new. His call for an architecture suited to “modern life” and “new materials
and the demands of the present” proved decisive in shaping the distinctive look of the
Viennese at the beginning of the century. Yet Wagner, like many of those who came
after him, never fully abandoned the past; even his most spare works are redolent of
Austria’s rich building history, especially its legacy from the Renaissance and the
Baroque. Early on, Wagner developed a new form language that mixed freely the
curvilinear lines of the Art Nouveau (Jugendstil) with classical features, compositional
strategies, and planning. By 1904, however, he had begun to pursue a more rectilinear,
abstract style that brought together elements of the old and new. The resulting fusion of
the classical and the modern characterized his most famous works, including the Postal
Savings Bank (1904-05) and the Church am Steinhof (1902-07).

Wagner’s many protégés and followers, although often tracing their own special paths,
continued to investigate the possibilities of innovation and historical revivalism. Joseph
Maria Olbrich, who worked in Wagner’s atelier around the turn of the century, sought a

new architectonic ideal in the florid lines and patterning of the Jugendstil. But Olbrich
was simultaneously drawn to archaic, Asian, and Near Eastern motifs, resulting in a
discernible note of exoticism in his designs, a tendency that has reappeared in the works
of many later Austrian architects. Josef Hoffmann, another of the architects who was
influenced by Wagner, sought to foster a new idiom from the language of rectilinear
geometry: the —the square style—that Hoffmann pioneered along with the graphic artist
and designer Koloman Moser, became the most widely admired—and imitated—images
of early Austrian modernism. Yet Hoffmann, after his brief flirtation with a geometric
purism, returned to employing elements from former times, experimenting at various
times with the Biedermeier, Baroque, Rococo, folk art, and Anglo-American traditions.
Many of Wagner’s former students from the Academy of Fine Arts in Vienna, among
them Hubert Gessner, Franz Gesser, Karl Ehn, and Rudolf Perco, adopted this same
approach in the 1920s and 1930s, combining features of Wagner’s modernized classicism
and other historical imagery.

A parallel, but equally important strain of Viennese modernism is descended from
Adolf Loos. During the early years of the 20th century, Loos formulated an alternative
vision of modern architecture based on his own idiosyncratic ideas of culture and form.
He rejected the Jugendstil as contrived and inappropriate, calling instead for an
architecture that would reflect honestly the inherent modernity he found in contemporary
urban life. This approach led Loos toward a new architecture of complexity and pluralism
most brilliantly expressed in his Goldman and Salatsch store on the Michaelerplatz in
Vienna (1910-11). Loos’s renunciation of the notion of a universal modern style was also
embraced by a number of Vienna’s younger generation of modernists, most notably
Oskar Strnad and Josef Frank, who in the years prior to 1914 developed their own
progressive critique of the Viennese

The implications of Loos’s ideas extended beyond traditional concepts of style.
Inspired by the linguistic and ethical writings of his friend Karl Kraus, Loos sought to
establish a modern architectonic language that would articulate his notions of propriety
and civility without sacrificing older conventions of material comfort. In his Goldman
and Salatsch Building, Loos also began to investigate a new spatial idea, the or
spaceplan, a system of interlocking rooms on multiple levels. In a series of later designs,
most notably the Moeller (1927-28) and Miiller (1929-30) houses, he raised the
concept to a high art, creating some of the most extraordinary spatial assemblages of the
modern era. Both of these notions—the concept of linguistic “appropriateness” and the
idea of intricate spatial play—exerted a strong influence on Loos’s followers and later
Austrian architects, including the philosopher-builder Ludwig Wittgenstein, Josef Frank,
and Hermann Czech.

World War I marked a caesura in the development of Austrian architecture. After
1918 the prosperity and stability of the prewar years gave way to a long period of
economic hardship and political uncertainty that ended only after 1945. Vienna, which
before the war had been the capital of an empire of 60 million inhabitants, was reduced to
a provincial city in a country of barely 6 million. The centerpiece of Austrian building
activity in the interwar years was a massive program launched by the Social Democratic
municipal government in Vienna to combat the city’s severe postwar housing shortage. In
contrast to similar housing programs in Germany and the Netherlands, however, the
Viennese experimented little with new construction technologies, relying instead on


conventional, labor-intensive building practices as a means of ensuring employment for
as many workers as possible.

With few exceptions, the Austrians of the interwar years also showed a decided
aversion to the modernist purism of Le Corbusier and the Bauhaus. The vast majority of
the Vienna communal housing projects were the work of the former Wagner students,
and their buildings, like Karl Ehn’s massive Karl-Marx-Hof (1926-30), reflected older,
traditional ideas of massing and composition. Even those architects like Ernst Lichtblau
and Walter Sobotka who subscribed to the general ideas of the Modern movement
exhibited a notable tendency in the 1920s and early 1930s to introduce historical forms
and complex patterning into their designs.

Among the few Austrians of the interwar period who conformed to tenets of the so-
called International Style were Ernst Plischke, Lois Welzenbacher, and Richard Neutra.
Plischke’s Liesing Labor Office in Vienna (1930-32) and Welzenbacher’s Turmhotel
Seeber in Solbad Hall (1930-31) both brilliantly encapsulated the best features of the
functionalist idiom, but neither architect was able to realize more than a handful of
works. Far more successful was the young Neutra, who immigrated to the United States
in the early 1920s and settled in California where he practiced for a time with Rudolph
M. Schindler, another Viennese-trained modernist. Together with Frederick Kiesler, who
moved to New York in the mid-1920s, the three architects would have a decisive impact
on American modern design, but their work exerted little, if any, influence in their
homeland.
The period between 1933 and 1938 formed the second major break in the history of
20th-century Austrian architecture. With the rise of the conservative Austrian clerica.
party and the later German annexation of Austria, many of the country’s leading
architects were forced to flee. Josef Frank moved to Sweden and Clemens Holzmeister to
Turkey, but the majority of Austrian exiles—among them Felix Augenfeld, Victor Gruen,
Ernst Lichtblau, and Bernard Rudofsky—sought refuge in the United States. Very few of
these exiles returned to Austria after 1945, depriving the country of some of its best
architectural talent.

The arduous task of rebuilding Austria after World War II fell to a small group of
mostly middle-aged architects who had been trained in the 1920s and 1930s. The most
significant of these figures were Holzmeister, who promoted an older, traditional, and
popular approach; Oswald Haerdtl, Hoffmann’s former assistant, whose buildings and
interiors carried on the tradition of a distinctive Austrian modernism; and Roland Rainer,
who developed a rational, decidedly antihistoricist architectural idiom. But it was a new
generation, most of whom had been students of Holzmeister at the Vienna Academy of
Fine Arts, including Friedrich Achleitner, Johann Gsteu, Hans Hollein, Wilhelm
Holzbauer, Friedrich Kurrent, Josef Lackner, Gustav Peichl, Anton Schweighofer, and
Johannes Spalt, who took the lead in shaping the direction of Austrian architecture after
the late 1950s. Gsteu, Holzbauer, Peichl, and the others sought to reestablish the links
with Austria’s prewar modernist tradition while at the same time responding to
contemporary trends abroad. The result was a more resolutely modernist and
constructivist architecture, one that for the first time began to explore fully the
possibilities of the newest construction methods. Also important in this development was
Karl Schwanzer, whose Museum des 20. Jahrhunderts (1959-62) and Philips Building
(1962-64) were widely admired.


In the midst of this fascination with technology and tectonics, Hollein, in his Retti
Candle Shop (1964-65) and subsequent works, demonstrated a renewed interest in
aestheticism, one that pointed firmly in the direction of Postmodernism. Like Holzmeister
before him, Hollein probed the potential of symbolism and representation, articulated not
only in formal terms, but also through materials and space. Other Austrian architects of
the 1960s, among them Haus-Rucker-Co (Laurids Ortner, Manfred Ortner, and Giinther
Zamp), Co-op Himmelb(lau (Wolf D.Prix and Helmut Swiczinsky), and Missing Link
(Adolf Krischanitz, Angela Heiterer, and Otto Kapfinger), rebelled against the avant-
garde of the previous decade, seeking to substitute a new architecture—visionary,
dynamic, and socially responsive—in the place of the dominant modernist
monumentalism of the time.

By the 1970s, the works of both the old and the new avantgarde began to attract
worldwide attention. Many of the old avant-garde—including Gsteu, Hollein, Kurrent,
Lackner, Peichl, and Spalt—received academic appointments, and both groups found
increasing numbers of commissions in Austria and abroad. Their position was challenged
in the mid-1970s by two new movements that arose outside Vienna, the Vorarlberger
Bauktinstler (Vorarlberg architect-builders) and the Grazer Schule (Graz School). The
former, concentrated in Bregenz near the border with Switzerland and represented by
Carlo Baumschlager, Dietmar Eberle, Roland Gnaiger, and Hermann Kaufmann, stressed
structural refinement and clear tectonic expression; the Graz School, led by Giinther
Domenig, Volker Giencke, and Klaus Kada, took an almost diametrically opposite
approach, emphasizing the organic and expressive aspects of building.

The designs of the Vorarlberger Baukiinstler, in spite of their use of regional, Alpine
elements, followed the broader development of late modernism. The work of the Graz
School, on the other hand, suggested a much more radical reinterpretation of 20th-century
architecture, at once nervous, irrational, complex, and sometimes even disturbing. Forged
at a moment when the faith in modernism had been broken, the architects of the Graz
School and their counterparts in Vienna, including Coop Himmelb(l)au and Helmut
Richter, challenged conventional notions of functionality, compositional form, and spatial
enclosure. Domenig’s Zentralsparkasse branch bank in the Favoriten section of Vienna
(1975-79), perhaps the most significant example of the early phase of the Graz School,
proffered a trembling assemblage of forms, evoking allusions to biomorphism. The more
recent works of Giencke, Kada, and the others evince this same interest in visual
dynamism, but add to it a greater formal and geometric complexity. Coop
Himmelb(l)au’s Falkenstrasse Roof Construction Project in Vienna (1983-88), among
the most celebrated Austrian designs of the last two decades, introduced not only a potent
construction-based aesthetic, but also a novel kind of space that is both challenging and
inspiring.

Austria in the 1990s presented an unusually rich and diverse architectural scene. At
one extreme were the buildings of Rob Krier, Heinz Tesar, and Hans Hollein, which
sought to reintroduce historical concepts and forms into the contemporary discourse
about urbanism and place. Hollein’s Haas House in Vienna (1985-90), among the most
controversial buildings of the era, demonstrated the long-standing Austrian attitude
toward combining and blending varied elements of the past and present. Hermann Czech
and Gustav Peichl, by contrast, made more specific allusions to the past, drawing in
particular from the early Austrian Others, like Wilhelm Holzbauer, Adolf Krischanitz,

and Boris Podrecca, worked more or less within the codes of late modernism, albeit also
with occasional backward glances. Younger architects, such as Florian Riegler and Roger
Riewe, designers of the Graz Airport (1992-94), sought to frame a new austerity within
the wrappings of technology. At the same time, Ortner & Orter, Coop Himmelb(l)au,
Volker Giencke, Klaus Kada, Helmut Richter, and their followers continued to challenge
the old orthodoxies, even while their buildings had become firmly positioned within the

mainstream.
CHRISTOPHER LONG

Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Co-op Himmelb(Iau (Austria); Czech,
Hermann (Austria); Frank, Josef (Austria); Hoffmann, Josef (Austria);
Hollein, Hans (Austria); Kada, Klaus (Austria); Karl Marx Hof, Vienna;
Loos, Adolf (Austria); Neutra, Richard (Austria); Olbrich, Josef Maria
(Austria); Post Office Savings Bank, Vienna; Steiner House, Vienna;
Vienna, Austria; Vienna Secession; Wagner, Otto (Austria)

Further Reading
Achleitner, Friedrich, Vienna: Osterreichische Fachzeitschriften, 1969
Achleitner, Friedrich, 4 vols., Salzburg and Vienna: Residenz Verlag, 1980
Achleitner, Friedrich, Vienna: Béhlau Verlag, 1996

(exh. cat.), Zentralvereinigung der Architekten Osterreichs/Vienna, Cologne, and
Weimar: Béhlau Verlag, 1992
Becker, Annette, Dietmar Steiner, and Wilfried Wang (editors), (exh. cat.),
Munich and New York: Prestel Verlag, 1995
Blau, Eve, Cambridge, Mass., and London: MIT Press, 1999

Boeckl, Matthias, (exh. cat.), Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1995
Co-op Himmelb(lau, New York: Rizzoli, 1983
Dimster, Frank, New York: Rizzoli, 1995
Domenig, Giinther, et al., Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1984
Feuerstein, Giinter, Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1988
Frampton, Kenneth (editor), (exh. cat.), New York: Institute for Architecture and

Urban Studies, 1980
Haiko, Peter, New York: Rizzoli, 1992
Kapfinger, Otto, Dietmar Steiner, and Adolph Stiller (editors), Barcelona: ACTAR,
and Basel: Birkhauser, 1999
(exh. cat.), Vienna: Osterreichische Gesellschaft fiir Architektur, 1976
Pelkonen, Eeva-Liisa, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London: MIT Press, 1996
Sarnitz, August, Vienna: Edition Tusch, 1984
Tabor, Jan, Vienna and Munich, 1992
Uhl, Ottokar, Vienna and Munich: Schroll, 1966
Zukowsky, John, and Ian Wardropper, (exh. cat.), Chicago: Chicago Art Institute,
Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1991

AUTOMOBILE

At the close of the millennium, many local and national politicians admitted what many
architectural critics and planners had noted for years: the landscape of post-World War II
America had been planned around automobiles more than around people. Reflecting the
nation’s great enthusiasm for automobility, the 20th-century landscape integrated this
transportation infrastructure and allowed it a defining influence. In some ways, this
dominance snuck up on many Americans; yet such change is more attributable to blinded
free choice than to naiveté: the 20th-century American lived under the spell of the open
road.

Although the United States seized the invention, the automobile was first developed in
Europe in the 1890s. French manufacturers marketed the first successful automobile in
1894. Inconvenience from a lack of roads and infrastructure as well as a dependence on
transportation technologies such as trolleys precluded Americans from rapidly accepting
the new “horseless carriage.” The manufacturing and marketing efforts of Henry Ford
and others changed this attitude by 1913, when there was one motor vehicle to every
eight Americans. Mass production made sure that by the 1920s, the car had become no
longer a luxury but a necessity of American middle-class life. The landscape, however,
had been designed around other modes of transport, including an urban scene dependent
on foot travel. Cars enabled an independence never before possible, if they were
supported with the necessary service structure. Massive architectural shifts were
necessary to make way for the automobile, as architects and planners reconfigured urban
street forms or designed new building types to accommodate the automobile. Congested
streets forced motorists to park and store their automobiles in a new building, the parking
garage. Early garages included mechanical systems and elevators to carry cars into tall
skyscraperlike garages. Smaller garages affiliated with hotels or commercial districts
proliferated. After World War II, motorists could select garages with attendants or, more
commonly by the 1970s and after, they could use selftpark garages. By the 1990s,
architects were designing tall garages for hundreds of cars. With retail storefronts at the
pedestrian level, many urban garages were designed to blend in with neighboring
buildings and styles.

Although the motorcar was the quintessential private instrument, its owners had to
operate it over public spaces. Who would pay for these public thoroughfares? After a
period of acclimation, Americans viewed highway building as a form of social and
economic therapy. They justified public financing for such projects on the theory that
roadway improvements would pay for themselves by increasing property-tax revenues
along the route. At this time, asphalt, macadam, and concrete were each used on different
roadways.

By the 1920s, the congested streets of urban areas pressed road building into other
areas. Most urban regions soon proposed express streets without stoplights or
intersections. These aesthetically conceived roadways, normally following the natural
topography of the land, soon took the name “parkways.” Long Island and Westchester
County, New York, used parkways with bridges and tunnels to separate these express
routes from local cross traffic. The Bronx River Parkway (1906), for instance, follows a

river park and forest; it also is the first roadway to be declared a national historic site. In
addition to pleasure driving, such roads stimulated automobile commuting.

The Federal Road Act of 1916 offered funds to states that organized highway
departments, designating 200,000 miles of road as primary and thus eligible for federal
funds. More important, ensuing legislation also created a Bureau of Public Roads to plan
a highway network to connect all cities of 50,000 or more inhabitants. Some states
adopted gasoline taxes to help finance the new roads. By 1925 the value of highway
construction projects exceeded $1 billion. Expansion continued through the Great
Depression, with road building becoming integral to city and town development.

Robert Moses of New York defined this new role as road builder and social planner.
Through his work in the greater New York City area (1928-60), Moses created a model
for a metropolis that included and even emphasized the automobile as opposed to mass
transportation. This was a dramatic change in the motivation of design. Historian Clay
McShane (1994) writes, “In their headlong search for modernity through mobility,
American urbanites made a decision to destroy the living environments of nineteenth-
century neighborhoods by converting their gathering places into traffic jams, their
playgrounds into motorways, and their shopping places into elongated parking lots.”

Outside of cities in the United States, major efforts were underway to knit
the nation together on a larger scale. In the 1910s, motorists and
commercial forces joined in the good-roads movement to establish early
national highways, such as the Lincoln Highway and the Dixie Highway.
Route 66, stretching southwest from Chicago through Illinois, Missouri,
Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California, ending
at Los Angeles, was to become the most celebrated interstate roadway.
While the road supplied an exodus for many Dust Bowl sufferers in the
1930s, Route 66 became even more important as a symbol. “Get your
kicks on Route 66” echoed through many musical moments as well as in
minutes of personal longing. For Americans, “America’s Main Street”
opened up westward and ushered in a period of comfortable cruising in
American automobiles. Probably more than any other roadway, Route 66
allowed the automobile to become a means for expressing the American
tradition of independence and freedom. Planners, designers, and
entrepreneurs sought methods to stimulate and take advantage of this new
American passion.


Aerial view of a housing development in Levittown, New York, under
construction

© Collection of New York World-Telegram and the Sun Newspaper
Photograph Collection (Library of Congress, United States). Photo by
Thomas Airviews, Bayside, New York

Drivers through the 1930s often slept in roadside yards, so developers soon took
advantage of this opportunity by devising the roadside camp or motel. Independently
owned tourist camps graduated from tents to cabins, which were often called “motor
courts.” After World War II, the form became a motel, in which all the rooms were tied
together in one structure. Still independently owned, by 1956 there were 70,000 motels
nationwide. Best Western and Holiday Inn soon used ideas of prefabrication to create
chains of motels throughout the United States. Holiday Inn defined this new part of the
automobile landscape by emphasizing uniformity so that travelers felt as if they were in a
familiar environment no matter where they traveled.

The automobile landscape, of course, needed to effectively incorporate its essential
raw material: petroleum. The gas station, which originally existed as little more than a
roadside shack, mirrors the evolution of the automobile-related architecture in general.
By the 1920s, filling stations had integrated garages and service facilities. These facilities
were privately owned and uniquely constructed. By the mid-1930s, oil giants, such as
Shell and Texaco, developed a range of prototype gas stations that would re-create the
site as a showroom for tires, motor oil, or other services. The architectural style clearly
derived from the International Style, with a sleek, white appearance. While carefully
dressed attendants were a vital part of the experience at many service stations, George
Urich introduced the United States’ first self-service gas station in California in 1947. By
the 1990s, this form had been further streamlined to include convenience stores and the
opportunity to pay at the pump. The gas station experience would steadily become less
personalized.

As automobiles became more familiar in everyday Americans’ lives, planners and
developers formalized refueling stations for the human drivers as well. Food stands
informally provided refreshment during these early days, but soon restaurants were
developed that utilized marketing strategies from the motel and petroleum industries.
Diners and family restaurants sought prime locations along frequently traveled roads;
however, these forms did not alter dining patterns significantly. White Castle (1921)
combined the food stand with the restaurant to create a restaurant that could be put almost
anywhere. Drive-in restaurants would evolve around the idea of quick service, often
allowing drivers to remain in their automobile. Fast food as a concept, of course, derives
specifically from Ray Kroc and the McDonald’s concept that he marketed out of
California (1952). Clearly the idea of providing service to automobile drivers had created
an entire offshoot of the restaurant industry.

Whereas most roadside building types evolved gradually, the drive-in theater was
deliberately invented. Richard M.Hollingshead Jr., of New Jersey, believed that
entertainment needed to incorporate the automobile. Hollingshead patented the first
drive-in in 1933, but the invention would not proliferate until the 1950s. Viewing outdoor
films in one’s car has become a symbol of the culture of consumption that overtook the
American middle class during the postwar era. Of course, it also established the
automobile as a portable, private oasis where youth could express their sexuality as well
as experiment with drugs and alcohol.

Most of these developments redefined the local landscape while creating few national
thoroughfares. President Dwight D. Eisenhower changed this in the 1950s. In 1920 he
had led troops across the American road system in a military call for new roads. Then he
had witnessed the spectacle of Hitler’s Autobahn firsthand. When he became president,
he worked with automobile manufacturers and others to devise a 1956 plan to connect
America’s future to the automobile. The interstate highway system was the most
expensive public works project in human history. The public rationale for this hefty
project revolved around fear of nuclear war: such roadways would assist in exiting urban
centers in the event of such a calamity. The emphasis, however, was clearly economic
expansion. At the cost of many older urban neighborhoods—often occupied by minority
groups—the huge wave of concrete was unrolled that linked all the major cities of the
nation.

With the national future clearly tied to cars, planners began perfecting ways of further
integrating the automobile into American domestic life. Initially, these tactics were quite
literal. In the early 20th century, many homes of wealthy Americans soon required the
ability to store vehicles. Most often, these homes had carriage houses or stables that could
be converted. Soon, of course, architects devised an appendage to the home and gave it
the French name “garage.” From this early point, housing in the United States closely
followed the integration of the automobile and roads into American life.

Upper- and middle-class Americans had begun moving to suburban areas in the late
1800s. The first suburban developments, such as Llewellyn Park, New Jersey (1856),
followed train lines or the corridors of other early mass transit. The automobile allowed
access to vast areas between and beyond these corridors. Suddenly, the suburban
hinterland around every city compounded. As early as 1940, about 13 million people
lived in communities beyond the reach of public transportation. Because of these
changes, suburbs could be planned for less wealthy Americans.


Modeled after the original Gustav Stickley homes or similar designs from —_ and other
popular magazines, middle-class suburbs appealed to working- and middle-class
Americans. The bungalow became one of the most popular designs in the nation. The
construction halt of the Great Depression set the stage for more recent ideas and designs,
including the ranch house. The basic features of the ranch house—its simple, informal,
one-story structure; its low-pitched eaves; and its large expanse of glass that included
“picture” windows—were fused in the public mind with the easygoing lifestyle identified
with the Southwest and West Coast.

Planners used home styles such as these to develop one site after another with the
automobile linking each one to the outside world. The world of Levittown (the first of
which was constructed in 1947) involved a complete dependence on automobile travel.
This shift to suburban living became a hallmark of the late 20th century, with over half
the nation residing in suburbs by the 1990s. The planning system that supported this
residential world, however, involved much more than roads. The services necessary to
support outlying, suburban communities also needed to be integrated by planners.

Instead of the Main Street prototype, the automobile suburbs demanded a new form.
Initially, planners such as Jesse Clyde Nichols devised shopping areas, such as Kansas
City’s Country Club District (1922), that appeared a hybrid of previous forms. In Lake
Forest, Illinois, Howard Van Doren Shaw designed Market Square (1916), perhaps the
first shopping center planned to address the automobile. Soon, however, the “strip” had
evolved as the commercial corridor of the future. These sites quickly became part of
suburban development in order to provide basic services close to home. A shopper rarely
arrived without an automobile; therefore, the car needed to be part of the design program.
The most obvious architectural development for speed was signage: integrated into the
overall site plan would be towering neon aberrations that identified services. In addition,
parking lots and drive-through windows suggest the integral role of transportation in this
new commerce.

These developments culminated in the shopping mall, which quickly became a
necessary portion of strip planning. By the 1970s, developers’ initiatives clearly included
regional economic development for a newly evolving service and retail world.
Incorporating suburbs into such development plans, designs for these pseudocommunities
were held together by the automobile. The marketplace for this culture quickly became
the shopping mall. Strip malls, which open onto roadways and parking lots, were
installed near residential areas as suburbs extended further from the city center.
Developers then perfected the self-sustained, enclosed shopping mall, which became the
symbol of a culture of conspicuous consumption that many Americans have criticized
since its first appearance. Try as they might, developers could never re-create the culture
of local communities in these new artificial environments.

Critics such as Jane Jacobs and James Kunstler identified an intrinsic bias on the
American landscape in the 1970s. Kunstler writes, “Americans have been living car-
centered lives for so long that the collective memory of what used to make a landscape or
a townscape or even a suburb humanly rewarding has nearly been erased.” The 1990s
closed with the unfolding of the new politics of urban sprawl. “I’ve come to the
conclusion,” explained Vice President Al Gore on the campaign trail in 1999, “that what
we really are faced with here is a systematic change from a pattern of uncontrolled sprawl
toward a brand new path that makes quality of life the goal of all our urban, suburban,

and farmland policies.” During the 20th century, planners and designers gave Americans
what they wanted: a life and landscape married to the automobile. A divorce will require
an entirely revised architectural program.
BRIAN BLACK
Roadside Architecture; Shaw, Howard Van Doren (United States);

Shopping Center; Suburban Planning

Further Reading
Belasco, Warren James, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1979
Calthorpe, Peter, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1993

Clark, Cifford Edward, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986
Flink, James J., © Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1988
Hart, John Fraser (editor), | Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991

Jackson, Kenneth T., New York: Oxford University Press, 1985
Jacobs, Jane, New York: Random House, 1961; London: Jonathan Cape, 1962
Kay, Jane Holtz, New York: Crown, 1997
Kunstler, James H., New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993
Lewis, Tom, New York: Viking, 1997
Liebs, Chester H., Boston: Little Brown, 1985
McShane, Clay, New York: Columbia University Press, 1994

Relph, Edward, Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, and London:
Croom Helm, 1987
Wright, Gwendolyn, New York: Pantheon, 1981

AVANT-GARDE

Taken literally, the avant-garde refers to the front part of a marching army, the scouts that
first head into unknown territory. As a metaphor, the word has been used from the 19th
century onward to refer to progressive political and artistic movements that considered
themselves to be ahead of their time. The avant-garde is struggling against the old,
heading toward the new. It is radical and controversial, fighting against consensus and
looking for disruption. The avant-garde radicalizes the basic principle of modernity: the
urge toward continual change and development. According to Matei Calinescu (1987), its
very radicality drives it to a conscious quest for crisis: Because the avantgarde attitude
implies the bluntest rejection of such traditional ideas as those of order, intelligibility, or
even success, its protagonists seek for an art that is to become an experience, deliberately
conducted, of failure and crisis. The most characteristic feature of the avant-garde,
therefore, might be the continuous cycling of short-lived movements that emerge and
whither away in rapid succession.

As early as 1962, Renato Poggioli described the avant-garde as characterized by four
moments: activism, antagonism, nihilism, and agonism. The activist moment meant
adventure and dynamism, an urge to action that is not necessarily linked to any positive
goal. The antagonistic character of the avant-garde refers to its combativeness; the avant-
garde is always struggling against something—against tradition, against the public, or
against the establishment. Activism and antagonism are often pursued in such a way that
an avant-garde movement finally overtakes itself in a nihilistic quest, in an uninterrupted
search for purity, ending up by dissolving into nothing. The avant garde is indeed
inclined to sacrifice itself on the altar of progress—a characteristic that Poggioli labels
agonistic.

During the last decades, the term avant-garde has acquired a more precise theoretical
meaning because of the work of Peter Burger (1974). The avant-garde is clearly
distinguished from modernism in that it is confined to a more limited range of ideas and
movements. According to Burger, the avant-garde in the visual arts and literature was
concerned to abolish the autonomy of art as an institution. Its aim was to put an end to the
existence of art as something separate from everyday life—of art, that is, as an
autonomous domain that has no real impact on the social system. The avant-garde, says
Burger, aims for a new life praxis, a praxis that is based on art and that constitutes an
alternative for the existing order. This alternative would no longer organize social life on
the basis of economic rationality and bourgeois conventions. It would rather found itself
on aesthetic sensibilities and on the creative potentialities of each individual.

Avant-gardism has been most prominent in literature and the arts, whereas its use in
the context of architecture was less common. Nevertheless, there has been a tendency to
identify the Modern movement as the avant-garde in architecture. The theoretical fine-
tuning urged by Burger, however, necessitates a modification of this too-simple
identification. Biirger's work also brought about a growing consensus to distinguish
between the historical avant-garde, chronologically situated before World War II, and the
neo-avant-garde, which is a more recent phenomenon.

The issues and themes around which the Modern movement in architecture
crystallized were surely related to the avant-garde logic of destruction of the old and
construction of the new. The Modern movement was based on a rejection of the
bourgeois culture of philistinism that used pretentious ornament and kitsch and that took
the form of eclecticism (Gusevich, 1987). In its stead, the movement gave precedence to
purity and authenticity. In the 1920s, these themes acquired a distinct political dimension:
The new architecture became associated with the desire for a more socially balanced and
egalitarian form of society in which the ideals of equal rights and emancipation would be
realized. The architectural vanguard, nevertheless, did not become as uncompromising
and as radical as its counterpart in art and literature. Most architects, for example, never
renounced the principle of rationality, even if it stood for a bourgeois value.

Therefore, it might be more productive not to speak of the Modern movement as
avant-garde but, rather, to distinguish certain avant-garde moments within its discourse,
for the movement was hardly a unified whole; rather, it consisted of widely differing
trends and tendencies. Manfredo Tafuri and Francesco Dal Co cite tendencies such as De
Stil in Holland, Productivism and Constructivism in Russia, and the late Expressionist
currents of the Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst and the Novembergruppe in Germany among the
architectural avant-garde. These movements, they argue, were inspired by an intensive


exchange between visual arts and architecture and a new social reality that was based on
a new, artistic outlook on the world.

The early writings of Swiss historian and critic Sigfried Giedion testify to an
aspiration to abolish architecture as a typology or segregated discipline. In (1928;

), Giedion questions the very idea of an architecture with definitive boundaries, and
his implicit suggestion is that architecture no longer has anything to do with objects. If it
is to survive at all, it must become part of a broader domain in which spatial relations and
concerns are of central importance. Herewith, Giedion formulates as a goal for
architecture that it would break out of the limits imposed on it by tradition and by its
functioning as an institution.

Although Giedion did not develop these potentially subversive considerations in any
radical way in his consecutive work, they were not completely idiosyncratic, either. The
thought that architecture should no longer limit itself to the design of representative
buildings but rather should develop into a more comprehensive discipline that is focusing
on the whole of the environment and that merges with social reality and with life itself
was shared by many prominent modern architects from the 1920s. Avant-garde architects
such as Walter Gropius, Hannes Meyer, and Ernst May believed that their mission had to
do with the design of all aspects of life, and they aimed at a reconceptualization of the
whole process of building, including construction techniques, housing typologies, and
urbanism. One of the most radical interpretations of such beliefs was to be found in the
work of Walter Benjamin.

Benjamin thought that the destructive gestures of the avantgarde, which aimed at
purification, were necessary to free the way for a revolutionary future. The transparency
and openness of the new architecture pointed for Benjamin to a revolutionary, classless
society based on emancipation and flexibility. He interpreted this architecture as part of
the avant-garde’s attack on bourgeois culture. The new architecture schooled inhabitants
and users to adapt to new social conditions that prefigured the future transparent society.
Benjamin saw architecture as a discipline that was capable of stimulating people to align
their attitudes with those required by the new society to come (Heynen, 1999).

The alignment between modern architecture and politically progressive tendencies was
thus clearly present in the 1920s and the early 1930s, in the self-reflection of its
representatives as well as in the discourse of major critics. This avant-garde position
claimed a new, more open and more socially relevant mission for architecture. It was
Utopian and critical, believing that the new future could be reached only by starting from
scratch. This position, however, did not dominate very long. When HenryRussell
Hitchcock and Philip Johnson introduced modern architecture to the United States, they
presented it as the latest and most topical style, leaving aside any social or political issues
( 1932). Giedion himself gravitated toward a similar position with his later (1941).
In presenting the space-time concept as a “secret synthesis” that was capable of building
a unity across very different disciplines, Giedion no longer referred to social experiments
or to the revolutionizing aims of the new architecture. Instead, he strove toward the
formulation of a common denominator that could unite rather diverse trends under the
banner of one “modern architecture,” thus formulating a certain orthodoxy that was at
odds with the continuous longing for change characteristic of the avant-garde.

This tendency toward consensus and orthodoxy in modern architecture was only
reinforced in the postwar years, when modern architecture was accepted by many

administrations as the most appropriate answer to the building needs of the
Reconstruction era. Modern architecture thus became institutionalized as part of the
establishment, and consequently, it took its leave from the avant-garde aspirations of the
1920s. It was therefore no coincidence that after World War II a gap opened up between
modern architecture and the avant-garde in the arts. They soon drifted quite apart. The
most vehement criticism that was leveled against modern architecture in the early
postwar years came from movements such as Lettrism and International Situationism
rather than from right-wing conservatives. International Situationism was based on the
program for a “unitary urbanism,” which consisted of a vigorous critique of current
modernist urbanism. Unitary urbanism rejected the utilitarian logic of the consumer
society, aiming instead for the realization of a dynamic city, a city in which freedom and
play would have a central role. By operating collectively, the Situationists aimed to
achieve a creative interpretation of their everyday surroundings, and they created
situations that subverted the normal state of affairs. The Situationists belonged to the neo-
avant-garde movements that formed an “avant-garde beyond modernism.” This neo-
avantgarde considered itself to be ahead of the masses in its search for the future but took
its distance from the more conciliatory, consensus-oriented mainstream modernism
because it was much more radical and Utopian.

Within the field of architecture, there were also groups, such as Archizoom,
Archigram, and Superstudio that moved beyond modernist ideas and could be called neo-
avant-garde. It is less clear, however, what the meanings of the terms “avant-garde” and
“neo-avant-garde” have become in the most recent decades. On the one hand, there is a
clear rejection of the avant-garde logic of destruction of the old and Utopian construction
of the new. It is stated that this logic is based on an ideology of progress, which has since
been proven to be false; that it gave rise to an elitist hermeticism that rendered its ideals
completely inaccessible to a general public; and that its supposedly radical innovations
and inventions nevertheless lend themselves all too well to appropriation by the culture
industry. This widely spread criticism would lead one to think that the avant-garde is
dead—a claim that has been made repeatedly. On the other hand, in the 1980s and the
90s, the notion of a contemporary neo-avantgarde has resurged in the work of Peter
Eisenman, Bernard Tschumi, and others. It seems clear, however, that this use of the term

is based on a perception of their position within a discursive field and that its
application has nothing to do with how they, contentwise, think about architecture. The
avant-garde and its significance for 20th-century architecture rests, then, with the
constant obliteration of boundaries between the arts and architecture, image and text, and
the meanings of old and new.

HILDE HEYNEN

Further Reading

The theoretization of what the avant-garde was all about took place mostly in fields
outside architectural theory or history. Poggioli presented an early focusing on the
arts. Burger published his seminal work in 1974 (it was translated in 1984). He took his
clues mainly from surrealism and Dadaism in literature and in the arts. Birger’s book
gave rise to an interesting debate in Germany, resulting in the publication of Lindner

(1976) and of Miller (1984). Calinescu (1987) offers a very interesting and reliable
source for clarifying terminological questions, but he does not focus on architecture.
Tafuri is the most important architectural historian who theoretically distinguishes
between avant-garde and modernism. Although there are no full-length books in English
dealing with the theme of architecture and avant-garde, there are some important
collections of essays (Ockman, 1988; Somol, 1997) as well as individual articles raising
interesting questions (Gusevich, 1987; Heynen, 1999). McLeod offers a feminist
criticism on the neo-avant-garde of the 1980s and the 1990s (1996).
Biirger, Peter, | Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1974; as _ translated by Michael
Shaw, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984
Calinescu, Matei, Durham: Duke University Press, 1987; revised edition of
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1977
Colomina, Beatriz and Joan Ockman (editors), | New York: Princeton Architectural
Press, 1988
Giedion, Sigfried, Leipzig: Klinkhardt and Biermann, 1928; as translated by
J.Duncan Berry, with an introduction by Sokratis Georgiadis, Santa Monica, California:
Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1995
Gusevich, Miriam, “Purity and Transgression: Reflection on the Architectural
Avantgarde’s Rejection of Kitsch,” 10, no. | (Fall-Winter 1987-88)
Heynen, Hilde, “What Belongs to Architecture?’ Avant-garde Ideas in the Modern
Movement,” 4, no. 2 (1999)
Ltidke, Werner Martin, et al. (editors), Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1976
McLeod, Mary, “Everyday and ‘Other’ Spaces,” in edited by Debra Coleman,
Elizabeth Danze, and Carol Henderson, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996
Miller, Michael, Frankfurt am Main: Syndikat, 1984
Poggioli, Renato, | Bologna: I Mulino, 1962; as translated by Gerald Fitzgerald,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1981
Somol, R.E. (editor), New York: Monacceli Press, 1997
Tafuri, Manfredo, and Francesco Dal Co, = Milano: Electa, 1976; as 2 vols.,
translated by Robert Erich Wolf, New York: Electa/Rizzoli, 1986
Tafuri, Manfredo, Torino: Einaudi, 1980; as translated by Pellegrino
d’Acierno and Robert Connolly, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1987


B

BATYOKE TOWER

Designed by Plan Architects; completed 1987 Bangkok, Thailand

Distinctive for its horizontal strips of rainbow color and a gableshaped roof, the first

Batyoke tower in Bangkok, Thailand, was famously known as the one-time tallest
reinforced-concrete building in Asia. This skyscraper signified the start of Thai high-rise
architectural development. Land Development, a real estate company dominated by the
Baiyoke family, the project developer and landowner, proposed this 42-story building to
serve as both a commercial and a residential complex. The company turned the site on
Rachaprarob Road, which once had been occupied by a large-scale theater, into a
garment and cloth market and a residential tower for the Pratunam district. Not only did
the garment and cloth business inside the building fit in well with the neighborhood’s
business in general, but it also eventually became one of the most significant wholesale
cloth markets in Bangkok for years to come.
Although the Baiyoke tower established the Baiyoke family among Bangkok’s
business society, the tower itself promoted its design firm, Plan Architect, for their use of
bright color and the composition of geometric forms. The design team represented a
collaboration between Plan Architect and Inter Arkitek. Sinn Phonghanyudh, Plan
Architect’s executive architect, was in charge of the design team, which included
Theeraphon Niyom (firm owner), Krongsak Chulamorkodt (partner), Boonrit
Kordilokrat, Chenkit Napawan, Sapark Aksharanugraha, and Songsak Visudharom. Their
design won the 1984 competition sponsored by the Baiyoke family. The winning design
proposed the most functional exploitation of the limited site as well as the remarkable
concept of building the tallest building in the region.

On its completion in 1987, the building contained 55,000 square meters, including two
main parts: podium and tower. The large-scale column-and-beam reinforced-concrete
podium covered almost the entire site. Each floor was marked by different color, forming
a vertical rainbow in downtown Bangkok. The ground, first, and second floors were
devoted to the garment and cloth market. The third floor was originally designed as
offices for rent but later was turned, in part, into cloth shops to serve the growing market.
The fourth floor held a gigantic food center and several minitheaters. The next five floors
served as a parking garage for over 500 cars, an estimation approximated to
accommodate the high density of car drivers in Bangkok during the 1980s. Architects
designed the roof at the top of the podium as a recreation center, including a swimming
pool and health center, serving residents of the tower above. The residential floors were
eventually converted to a hotel complex. Its structure, supported by the shared structure


of the podium, was erected with flat-slab layers of a cross shape. Each residential floor
combined eight units, each with a single shared wall. Four elevators at the tower core ran
from the ground floor to the top, separating the tower’s access from that of the podium.
Other facilities were likewise designed separately for serving the tower’s residents and
the users inside the podium area. Despite the shared structure of the podium and tower
parts, Baiyoke tower was designed as two very different buildings. In fact, this design
reflected a common trend of multifunction complex favored among Bangkok’s real estate
development during the late 20th century.

Shortly following the success of the project, the Batyoke real estate developer decided
in 1988 to initiate a second project, Baiyoke II, with a similar publicized theme of
establishing another record for the world’s tallest reinforced-concrete building. This
follow-up project, however, was interrupted a few times during Thai financial turbulence
in the 1990s. The building was finally opened to the public in 1999, taking more than ten
years to complete. This long wait contrasted to the three-year construction period of its
fellow building, the first Baiyoke.

The Baiyoke II consisted of 172,000 square meters, more than three times the first
Baiyoke’s space. The project comprised 88 floors, 309 meters in total height above
ground (including the tower’s antenna but excluding the two underground floors). The
building functioned mainly as a hotel and included a shopping plaza and a parking
garage—an intrinsic element of contemporary Bangkok’s architecture. The ground floor
through the fourth floor served as retail shops, and the next ten floors consisted of
parking space. The hotel business occupied space from the 15th floor up, with the top ten
floors designed to serve as space for sky lounges, restaurants, and kitchen areas. The
main observation lounge for tourists and visitors was located on the 76th floor, whereas
access to the very top floors remained exclusive to hotel guests and the restaurants’
clients.

Unlike the first Baiyoke’s colorful theme, the Plan Architect design team
conceptualized the second Baiyoke building as a massive red block rising from the
ground, with a glittering gold roof that signified the golden roof of a Thai temple, an
omnipresent metaphoric symbol of Thai culture. In the design proposal of Plan
Architects, the design team once mentioned that the mass of colorful red sandstone
represented “the image of natural sandstone rising from the earth, punched out to provide
space for human’s various activities. The higher it goes, the more modernized and
sophisticated these various voids become.”

To be modernized or not remains an unfinished argument for which there is hardly an
answer, not only for both Baiyoke towers but also for contemporary Bangkok
architecture in general. The issues of “modern” and “modernity” have led many Thai
architects to confront problems in interpreting and defining designs to suit the terms.
Along with layers of interpretation and influences from foreign architectural
development, definitions vary and thus have brought up various designs. The Baiyoke
towers’ significant contribution to the city, with extension to the Southeast Asian region,
was essential in that they challenged the general geographic condition and virtually
turned Bangkok’s architectural development into a new phase of high-rise architectural
development.

VIMALIN RUJIVACHARAKUL
Bangkok, Thailand

Further Reading

Association of Siamese Architects, research by Vimolsidhi Horayangkura, Kobkul
Indaravichitr, Santi Chantavilaswons, Veera Inpantang. (Development of
Architectural Form: The Past, Present, and Future), Bangkok: Amarintr Publishing, 1993

BAKER, HERBERT 1862-1946

Architect, England and South Africa

Herbert Baker’s prolific practice produced a wide variety of work in England and
abroad. His work ranged from country houses to ecclesiastical work and public buildings
and most notably includes the government Houses in both South Africa and India.
Indeed, Baker is credited with the creation of a South African architecture by giving
expression to the dreams of his great patron, Cecil Rhodes, who wished to create a
distinguished and permanent culture.

As a contemporary of Edwin Lutyens, Baker’s particular distinction lay in his ability
to range from Arts and Crafts in his domestic work, to a dignified monumental style,
sensitively modified to accommodate technology, and different national and climatic
conditions.

Baker was born in Kent, and attended the Royal Academy School, London, from 1879
until 1881, when he was apprenticed to his cousin, Arthur Baker. Between 1882 and
1887, he served as lead assistant in the office of celebrated domestic architects, George
and Peto, where he claimed to have gained invaluable experience. Emphasis was placed
on the importance of working drawings, sketching tours, and above all, respect for high
levels of craftsmanship. It was there that he met Lutyens, who was an apprentice with the
firm from 1887.

In 1892 Baker began his own practice in Cape Town, South Africa, where he met
Rhodes, who commissioned the restoration of his home, Groote Schuur. It was originally
completed in 1895 but destroyed by fire and rebuilt by Baker. The final design was an
adaptation of the old Cape Dutch style and alerted South Africans to the supremacy of
their 17th- and 18th-century buildings over recent 19th-century work. The interiors are
indebted to George and Peto, in Baker’s elaborate amalgamation of English Tudor and
Cape Dutch and in his employment of a consistent group of craftsmen.

Baker was appointed diocesan architect for Cape Town, and was responsible for
building many churches, including St. George’s Cathedral (1898, Cape Town), all of
which were characterized by a round-arched style that combined rough-hewn stone and
white plaster. A flow of both domestic and commercial buildings followed.

Baker designed many houses in Johannesburg built in response to the short-lived
mining boom. His style provided a synthesis of indigenous sources, including
Mediterranean vernacular, and English Arts and Crafts, which were emulated in
numerous suburbs.

In 1900 Baker retraced Rhodes’s steps while on a tour of Egypt, Greece, and Italy.
Rhodes’s tour had inspired him to a series of classical architectural dreams that sadly


were to materialize only in his memorial, which was built by Baker at Mowbray, Cape
Town. Baker also designed memorials to the Shangani tribe for the Matabele War of
1897 and a monument, the (1905), at Kimberley, Cape Province, that was inspired by
Rome and Agrigentum. Following Rhodes’s death in 1902, Lord Milner assumed
responsibility for reconstruction in the Transvaal and Orange River Colony after the Boer
War.

Baker and his partner, Francis E.Masey, produced government buildings, churches,
houses, and agricultural and mining settlements. Pretoria Cathedral was begun in 1905,
but was only partially completed. Government House (1907, Pretoria) and Pretoria
Railway Station (1909) heralded the Union Buildings style. The work was commissioned
by General Botha, South Africa’s first prime minister, and came as a result of the
legislature remaining in Cape Town; the Pretoria Union Buildings (1912) represent
Baker’s most important work in South Africa, and lend expression to his belief that a
nation should demonstrate pride by the creation of noble monuments. In this work,
traditional European Neoclassical forms were combined with a serious concern to adapt
to local materials and technology. Twin cupola towers, evoking Wren’s Greenwich
Hospital, were linked by a concave hemicycle to prevent them from dominating the low
ground that they crowned.

Lutyens recommended that Baker share with him in the building of the
new government buildings in New Delhi. Unfortunately a disagreement
over the leveling of the central King’s Way leading to Lutyen’s Viceregal
Lodge led to a long estrangement. Whereas Baker’s designs were
sympathetic to the Mogul tradition, those by Lutyens were rather more
dispassionate and individual. In 1913 Baker returned to England and, with
his subsequent partner, Francis Fleming, designed the twin-domed
Secretariat Building and the circular Legislature Building.

In 1917 the War Graves Commission invited Baker to make recommendations about
cemeteries and monuments that were designed to give expression to inarticulated grief.
Compared with Lutyens, who strove for abstract monumentality, Baker favored a more
literal symbolism, reveling in the intricacies of heraldry and literary quotation. His
designs included the Indian Memorial at Neuve Chapelle and the South African
Memorial at Deville Wood. He produced a formidable number of buildings in England

following World War I, culminating in South Africa House (1935) in London.

Following a distinguished career, Baker was knighted in 1926.

HILARY J.GRAINGER

Africa: Southern and Central Africa; Arts and Crafts Movement;

Lutyens, Edwin (Great Britain)

Pretoria Railway Station, Pretoria,
South Africa (1909), photographed
designed by Herbert Baker

© Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORBIS

Biography

Born in Cobham, Kent, England, 9 June 1862. Studied at the Royal Academy School of
Architecture, London 1879-81; apprenticed to cousin Arthur Baker, architect 1879-82.
Married Florence Edmeades 1904:4 children. Worked for Emest George and Harold
Peto, London 1882-87. Opened office in Gravesend, Kent 1890; moved to Cape Town,
South Africa and was appointed architect to Cecil Rhodes 1892; opened office in
Johannesburg, South Africa 1902; formed partnership first with Willmott Sloper, then
Francis Flemming; returned to London in 1913 and continued practice until 1946; worked
with Edwin Lutyens in New Delhi, India 1913-31; principal architect to Imperial War
Graves Commission 1918-28; architect to the Bank of England from 1921. Fellow, Royal
Institute of British Architects 1900; founder and member, South African Society of
Architects 1901; associate, Royal Academy 1922; member, Royal Academy 1932.
Knighted 1926; Gold Medal, Royal Institute of British Architects 1927. Died in Cobham,
Kent, England, 4 February 1946.

Selected Works

Groote Schuur (Cecil Rhodes House), Rondesbosch, South Africa, 1895; rebuilt after
fire, 1897
St. George’s Cathedral, Cape Town, 1898
Kimberley Siege Memorial, Cape Province, 1905
Pretoria Cathedral (incomplete), Pretoria, 1905
Government House, Pretoria, 1907
Cecil Rhodes Memorial, Mowbray, 1908
Railway Station, Pretoria, 1909
Union Buildings, Pretoria, 1912
Numerous war cemeteries and memorials, Belgium, France, England, 1918-28
India House, Aldwych, London, 1925
Secretariat Building, New Delhi, 1927
Legislative Assembly Building, New Delhi, 1928

South Africa House, Trafalgar Square, London, 1935

Selected Publications

(with Arthur Baker), 1888
1934
1944

Further Reading

There is no published monograph on Baker. For a complete account, including notes on
his assistants and partners, see Greig. Baker’s autobiographical work (1944; see above)
and Reilly provide an interesting contemporary context in which to locate Baker’s
practice. The following texts examine various aspects of his life, career, and individual
commissions.
“The Government Buildings of Pretoria, New Delhi, Rhodesia and Kenya,”
(December 1927)
Gradidge, Roderick, London: Constable, and New York: Braziller, 1980
Gray, A.Stuart, London: Duckworth, 1985; Iowa City: University of Iowa Press,
1986
Greig, Doreen E., Cape Town and New York: Purnell, 1970
Irving, Robert G., New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1981
Le Roux, W.J. (editor), Pretoria: South Africa Department of Information, 1970
Reilly, C.H., London: Batsford, 1931; Freeport, New York: Books for Libraries
Press, 1967

Stringer, P., “Sir Herbert Baker and His Collaboration with Sir Edwin Lutyens at New
Delhi” (M.Phil, thesis), Thames Polytechnic

BANGKOK, THAILAND

With the abrupt change that accompanied the arrival of European art and architectural
styles during the late 19th century, Bangkok of the 20th century emerged as an
international city, emulating Western urban formation and leaving behind its former
structure of canals and teak buildings along the riverside. “Venice of the East” was
effaced; replacing it are layers of different modern architectural styles, in which
“modern” is defined variously according to different contemporaneous Euro-American
architectural currents, imported into Thailand through different means. Over the century,
however, the fabrication of “the East-meets-West” architecture occasionally occurred.
But by the end of the century, the mass of concrete high-rise buildings has become an
unprecedented image of Bangkok’s skyline.

The proliferation of Western influence on Bangkok architecture during the first half of

the century was largely due to the sociopolitical reformation during the late 19th and
early 20th centuries. It began in the last decades of the 19th century when King Rama V
(Chulalongkorn, 1853-1910) officially introduced Western practices of both
sociopolitical structure and city formation. Given the government’s incentive to
modernize Thailand, the imported culture was no longer perceived as foreign practice,
but as fundamental composition of national modernization process, to which Western-
style practices were not only imposed on, but also adapted to, the existing condition of
Thai society.
By 1920 neoclassical architecture outshone other types of buildings, particularly in the
heart of the present-day Bangkok’s old town due to the large number of royally imported
Italian artists and architects. The Grand Palace’s new complex, including the
Barommabhiman Palace and the Royal Innercourt division, the Dusit Palace complex,
and a group of Ministries’ buildings along Rajdamnern Road, were among the foremost
evidences. Some of the outstanding Thai and foreign architects of the period included
Prince Narissaranuwattiwongs (Vimanmek Palace and Benjamabopitr temple), Carl
Dohring (Bangkhunprom Palace), and M.Tamanyo (Anantasamakom Palace).

As favor for European-derived architecture grew, foreign artists, architects, and
engineers flooded into the country to design new buildings, while many young Thai
scholars went aboard to study and also to experience the culture of the other hemisphere.
When they returned to Thailand, many of them reset the standard of the Thai lifestyle,
which in turn radically altered Thai mentality and daily life practices, and their influence
could be observed even more clearly in architecture of the later period; Western influence
was manifested not merely by the exterior, but more importantly through the use of space
and the emulation of Western daily life practices inside the building. Consequently, the
development of Thai architectural design from the 191 Os through the 1930s could be
called an experimental period, the moment in which Thai architects attempted to create
space that not only accompanied more “modern/civilized” practices, but also suited


tropical weather. Different combinations of materials and technology gave rise to various
architectural styles and building forms, as can be seen in the architectural evidences of
the Marukkatayawan and the Klaikangvol Palaces.

Meanwhile, in 1934, seven professional Thai architects, Pra-
Sarojrattananimman, Luang-Burakarmkovit, Nart Pothiprasat,
M.J.Ithithepsan Kridakorn, M.J.Votayakorn Voravan, Sivavong Kunchorn
na Ayudthaya, M.J.Prasomsavat Suksavat, and Chitrasen Sanitwongs,
established the first national association of architectural professionals
under the name of Association of Siamese Architects (ASA). The book
one of a few comprehensive books on modern Thai architectural history,
mentioned that the designs of these seven architects, exemplifying that of
other contemporaneous Thai architects, were influenced largely by the
concept taught during the early 20th century at the Beaux-Arts School, a
place where many of them were trained. In fact, the omnipresent trend of
the Beaux-Arts school during the early 20th century was known for its
search for national identity within the formation of modern-style
architecture; consequently, an emulating political concept was indeed
gradually implanted and flourished among Thai architects during that
period of time.

Vimanmek Palace, Bangkok, designed
by Prince Narissaranuwattiwongs (
1900)

© Luca L.Tettoni/CORBIS

Such political incentive in architectural design became even more solidified through the
rise of different political leaders after the political situations of the 1932 revolution,
which changed the national political structure from absolute monarchy to democracy, and
after the rise of nationalism during World War II. The political fragments unwittingly
geared Thai society toward a search for a unifying discourse, a way to express the
nation’s identity. The idea in designing public buildings shifted from the sole expression
of the government, as had occurred in the dynastic dynamic, to the representation of
collective identity—a “modern” identity of democratic Thailand. The elaborate
decorative styles became outdated as they were seen to symbolize feudalism; modern
architectural style of different trends in Europe were adopted as a solution for an identity
search, a situation resembling that of many other countries at the same period. The use of
simple geometric forms and a playful arrangement of both horizontal and vertical planes
became dominant. Although many of the contemporaneous buildings were destroyed
during the bombing of World War II, one could still find images of buildings built during
this period, such as the shophouse along Rajdamnern Road and that of the adjacent
neighborhoods including the former Chalerm-Thai theater.

Within the decades following, Bangkok grew from a small Asian capital into a
medium-size international metropolitan city. International economic growth during the
1960s and 1970s resulted in a surge of the importation of newer architectural influences
from abroad. The design goal in general was no longer to emulate Western modernity,
but to drive Bangkok to reach “the international standard,” as represented by other
metropolises. Modernism, particularly that of the International Style, became popular
among Thai designers and architects, outdistancing other styles. High-rise buildings with
sun-shading elements and cement blocks took on a major part in changing the cityscape.
New business districts emerged along Sukhumvit, Silom, Rama V, and Sathorn roads,
and the preceding ones around the old town began to fade away. All these changes
affected the general layout of Bangkok, as the city began to grow toward the East and the
North, while its old town, and the western part, including the Thonburi district across the
Chao Phraya River, were left remaining more or less with its former skyline.

Another interesting architectural movement during 1960s was the revival of traditional
Thai-style architecture. Several designs of M.J.Samaichalerm and M.R.Mitrarun for royal
buildings and temporary ceremonial stands reflected the preference of following
traditional architectural grammar, but with an adaptation of material and construction
technology. A similar attempt of Luang Visalsilpakarm could be seen in his designs of
several Buddhist temples, including the elegant Wat Amarintraram. A younger generation
such as Pinyo Suwankiri evoked and grounded concerns for traditional Thai architecture
in many schools of architecture in Bangkok. The design of traditional Thai architecture in
general, however, was utilized quite exclusively for royal and religious ceremonies and
related practices.

Despite the challenges of unstable politics and military interference, the period from
the 1970s to the 1980s was the beginning of the Bangkok real estate boom, which
continued into the next decade before it gradually slowed down by the mid-1990s. Given
the rapid growth of the population and the increasing number of immigrants from the
countryside, housing and land development predominated over other forms of real estate
investment. Agricultural land around Bangkok was developed into residential areas,
particularly that extending from the new business districts on the north and east sides.

no


Newly developed and/ or rehabilitated villages sprang up and were eventually integrated
to become the city’s new districts. Consequently, Bangkok kept growing with no fully
restricting zoning control and proper transportation systems. In addition, the design for
Thai suburban real estate development suggested another challenging point in modern
Thai architectural development in that, to begin with, it generally reflected that Thai
architectural realm encompassed the most influential trend of the era, modernism, merely
through the use of materials and through the Western-replicating forms.

A slightly economic decline occurred during the end of 1970s and the beginning of
1980s when fears of Communism throughout Southeast Asia were compounded by
political disturbance, along with the energy crisis. Yet the city kept growing, and the
number of high-rise buildings in business districts eventually increased, following the
strengthening of Thai politics and international connections. By the end of the 1980s,
more than half of today’s high-rise buildings in Bangkok’s downtown were constructed.
The headquarters of banks and financial companies lined Silom, Sathorn, and Sukhumvit
Roads. The offices of Bangkok Bank on Silom Road, designed by Krisda Arunwongs,
and Thai Farmer Bank on Paholyuthin Road, designed by Rangsan Torsuwan, created a
stir in the Thai architectural design movement, as their designs were the very first
recognizable construction of the grand-scale high-rise office buildings. The completion of
an international award-wining robot-shape Asia Bank building, designed by Sumet
Jumsai, enhanced the world’s recognition of modern Thai architecture. The peak moment
of Thai high-rise building culminated with the completion of the one-time tallest
reinforced concrete building in Asia, Baiyoke Building, in 1987, designed in chief by an
architectural team from Plan Architect, underscoring a virtual transformation of
Bangkok’s skyline.

During the late 1980s, flat slab and glass wall construction came into favor in
designing Bangkok’s high-rise architecture. The growth of the Thai concrete and glass-
wall industries supported the movement. The general design of the trend’s new high-rise
buildings, such as Thai Airways Building, Sin Asia Building, and Orkarn Building, thus
differentiated itself from its predecessors with the surface design’s material and a more
elaborate interior decoration. To architects, designing with flat slab and glass wall
became, for some time, fashionably intrinsic to high-rise architecture. Yet, to the general
public’s perception, buildings with linear strips such as the two Headquarters of Bangkok
Bank and Shell Gas Company exemplified the majority of Bangkok’s architecture in the
1980s, but the cloud reflection on the mirror wall of the new Thai Airways office
building on Vipavadee Road induced their imagination of the future Bangkok.

Meanwhile, another architectural trend was introduced to Bangkok through the
Postmodernism influence. The neoclassical style Amarintr shopping plaza twisted the
atmosphere of Erawan Square, from a postwar-World War II] modern architectural
environment to a reconstructed 19th-century European atmosphere. Yet, as time passed,
the Postmodernist trend lost its popularity among architects, but its influence was rooted
in the design of individual houses, luxurious housing development in particular.

The continuing escalation of the Thai economy during the early 1990s was a key to the
construction of many grand-scale buildings. The National Queen Sirikit Convention
Center, designed by Design 103 Architects firm, purposely built to serve as an
international convention center, shed light on the use of high-span structure and the
concern for energy conservation. The form itself exemplified other buildings in which the


architects attempted to combine the form of traditional Thai architecture, the pointed roof
in particular, with modern architectural elements. Yet, even though the “East-meets-
West” situation has been a longtime concern of modern Thai architects, thus far it has not
yet been fully developed, either in terms of form or concept. The closest was that of Dan
Wongsprasat’s design of Regent Hotel on Sathorn Road; the architect integrated the
design for tropical weather with the simplified form of Thai Panya-roof house into the
design of the hotel building and its interior courts. Similar attempts, for example,
included Sumet Jumsai’s design of the Dome Building at the new campus of Thammasat
University and the Moblex Firm’s design of the Rajmongkol Conference Center inside
the Suang Luang Public Garden.

In contrast to the architects’ struggle in conceptualizing and refining modern Thai
architecture, traditional Thai architecture during the last half of the century is well
regarded and more developed. The complex of Ruen Thai architecture at Chulalongkorn
University, designed by Pinyu Suwankiri, has become a significant prototype for late-
20th-century central-Thai region’s architecture. Its elegant atmosphere and serene
landscape was occasionally epitomized as the essential characters of traditional Thai
architecture. Yet, other variations do exist, such as the sacred complex of the City Shine
in the old town center and the solemn Chalerm-prakiet-King-Bhumipol building in front
of the National Library.

Unlike the beginning of the decade, the economic crisis in 1997 turned Bangkok into
one of the most challenging moments, particularly for that of architectural development.
More than 70 real estate projects in Bangkok have been pending, some were sold to
foreign owners, but many were left with their half-built structure. The city was then
covered with the remains of unfinished construction projects, which yet waited to be
revived in times to come. As many noticed, most interruptions over the 200 years of
Bangkok’s growth often turned the city itself into a newer and better phase of
development.

VIMALIN RUJIVACHARAKUL
Baiyoke Tower, Bangkok

Further Reading

Association of Siamese Architects, research by Vimolsidhi Horayangkura, Kobkul
Indaravichitr, Santi Chantavilaswons, Veera Inpantang, (Development of
Architectural Form: The Past, Present, and Future), Bangkok: Amarintr Publishing, 1993
Kostof, Spiro, “Architecture and the State,” in | New York: Oxford University Press,
1995
Saksri, M.R.Nangnoi, Pusdee Tiptus, M.R.Chanvut Voravan, Veera Sajjakul, Lesom
Stapitanont, and Bandhit Chulasai (editors), (Physical Composition of Bangkok),
Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University, 1991

Silpakorn University, The Italian Embassy in Thailand, The Department of Fine Arts,
Bangkok, 1997
Tiptus, Pusdee, and Manop Pongstat, (Houses in Bangkok), Bangkok: Chulalongkorn
University, 1982

BANHAM, REYNER 1922-88

Architectural historian and critic, England

Reyner Banham was an iconoclastic British architectural historian and design critic
whose irreverent writings spanned an enormous range of topics and audiences—
everything from traditional architectural history to discipline-bending academic studies,
from advocacy criticism for his avant-gardist contemporaries to journalistic popular
culture reviews. Trained first as an aeronautical engineer and only later as an architectural
historian under Nikolaus Pevsner at the Courtauld Institute in London, Banham was
fascinated by questions of technology and technological expression. Acting something
like modernism’s guilty conscience, he challenged mid-20th-century architecture to
realize its earlier unfulfilled promises of functionalism and machine aesthetics.
Simultaneously, he celebrated the actual technological achievements realized by the
popular cultures of the industrialized world. He turned a sharp eye toward the potato
crisp, cult films, surfboards, California air shows, and London Raves and found in them
the promises and achievements of a culture living at the speed of the machine.

After leaving behind his wartime career as an aeronautical engineer and a short-lived
career as a newspaper art critic, Banham enrolled in the prestigious Courtauld Institute.
There, he quickly won the admiration of Pevsner and within a few short years found
himself in dialogue with London’s most interesting architects and artists and on the staff
ofthe . Like many around him during the difficult postwar years, Banham developed a
strange joint infatuation—on the one hand obsessed with the inaccessible splendor of
U.S. consumerism and on the other admiring the late Surrealist and Abstract
Expressionist strategies of formlessness and material ineloquence. The fusion of these
two gave rise to the so-called Independent Group in London—a group of Pop-affiliated
artists and architects that included Banham, Peter and Alison Smithson, Eduardo
Paolozzi, Lawrence Alloway, Richard Hamilton, John McHale, and Nigel Henderson,
among others—out of which commenced Banham’s struggle to craft an During this
period, he was the studio critic for the movement known as New Brutalism and
passionately endorsed its material and technological facticity and its proto-Pop interests
in American advertising.
With the publication of his doctoral dissertation in 1960, Banham
gave academic rigor to his earlier enthusiasms. In a rich and convincing
study, he outlined two competing tendencies within the history of the
Modern movement, one compositional and traditional, the other dynamic
and technological. Upending the familiar arguments, Banham claimed that
the International Style, often considered to be a functionalist architecture,
was in fact essentially a symbolic and aesthetic movement. In
contradistinction, Banham championed the work of the early-20th-century
Italian Futurists and Buckminster Fuller, whom he claimed had more fully
internalized the dynamism of machine-age culture. Quoting Fuller,
Banham characterized technology as “the unhaltable trend to constantly


accelerating change.” He concluded with a polemical challenge to the
profession:

The architect who proposes to run with technology knows now that he
will be in fast company, and that, in order to keep up, he may have to
emulate the futurists and discard the whole cultural load, including the
professional garments by which he is recognized as an architect. (Banham,
1960)

Extrapolating from the conclusions of | Banham wrote a number of essays in the 1960s
that examined the impact of “second” machine-age technologies on architecture. With an
eye toward things such as television, inflatable buildings, demountable geodesic domes,
mobile homes, and “architecture-less” drive-in movie theaters, Banham argued that the
traditional architectural virtues of permanence and monumentality were becoming
increasingly irrelevant. As he put it,

When your house contains such a complex of piping, flues, ducts, wires,
lights, inlets, outlets, ovens, sinks, refuse disposers, hi-fi reverberators,
antennae, conduits, freezers, heaters—when it contains so many services
that the hardware could stand up by itself without any assistance from the
house, why have a house to hold it up?... what is the house doing except
concealing your mechanical pudenda from the stares of folks on the
sidewalk? (Banham, 1960)

This line of argument reached its zenith, at least in an academic sense, with the

publication in 1969 of Banham’s discipline-stretching study . Discreetly posing as a
history of environmental technologies (for example, lighting, ventilation, heating, and air
conditioning) and loosely extrapolated from Sigfried Giedion’s canonical (1950), in

actuality Banham’s argument was a revisionist end run around the genealogy of
modernism, an attempt to imagine (and instigate) an architectural future.

However, any description of Banham would be only half complete if it ended with his
vision of the good life lived mechanically in a “polythene bag.” Just as surely as Banham
was a careful reader of science, he was also an enthusiastic reader of science fiction. His
was a pop sensibility as comfortable with robots and Martians and bikini-clad warriors as
with ventilator flows. From his earliest days with the Independent Group, Banham had
celebrated the excessive technological imagery of the American post-war consumer
boom. He wrote lovingly of Detroit’s baroque chrome ornament, the physiognomy of the
American hamburger, drag racing and custom-car culture, ice cream wagons, and even
Disneyland, Coca-Cola, and the Santa Monica Pier. Given these infatuations, it was
probably inevitable that Banham would find himself drawn to the United States, and after
several extended study and research tours in the mid-1960s, he eventually relocated for
good in 1976, first to Buffalo and then to California.

It was with the California dream of a tanned noble savage—that New World polyglot
of surfboards, rock and roll, balloon frames, freeways, “gizmos,” and mad scientists—
that Banham discovered his long-sought synthesis between the cultures of consumerist
affluence and technological potlatch. His brilliant 1971 book paints a celebratory

picture of a city infused with the rhythms of bodies and cultures in motion. With its
bronzed warriors, endless sunshine, and endless freeways (which necessitated that he
learn to drive in order to “read Los Angeles in the original”), Banham had found at last an
urbanism in which “mobility outweighs monumentality” and that sparkled with the
fantasies of endless selftinvention and renewal. For Banham, Los Angeles was “a
reasonable facsimile of Eden” (Banham, 1971).

The impact of Banham’s writings echoed into the second half of the 20th century. If at
times his critique of the profession of architecture seemed totalizing and radically
pessimistic, when he did discover architects whom he liked—figures as diverse as
Archigram, Bruce Goff, the Japanese megastructuralists, or James Stirling—Banham’s
wide-eyed enthusiasms proved disarmingly contagious. His obsessions with hygiene,
waste, and the nonvisual body undoubtedly will only continue to grow in theoretical
importance. His eloquence on behalf of the American techno-vernacular had, with the
exception perhaps of J.B.Jackson, no equal; and, if regrettably some of Banham’s
writings now seem compromised by an irreverent sensibility—long on the furry, the
puerile, and the machismo—the radical character of his scholarship and the eloquence
and playfulness of his pen guarantee that Banham will continue to provoke, please, and
astound.

RONN DANIEL
Archigram; Fuller, Richard Buckminster (United States); Pevsner,
Nikolaus (Great Britain); Postmodernism; Smithson, Peter and Alison

(Great Britain); Vernacular Architecture

Biography

Born in Norwich, England, 2 March 1922. Apprentice, Bristol Aeroplane Company
1939-45; studied art history, Courtauld Institute, London 1949-52; earned a doctorate
under Nikolaus Pevsner; received a research fellowship in Chicago 1964-66. Married
Mary Mullet, art teacher 1946. Wrote art reviews in local journals, Norwich 1946-49;
lecturer, Norwich 1946-49; stage manager, Norwich theater 1946-49; editor, 1952.
Lecturer, Bartlett School of Architecture, London 1960-69; chair of architectural history,
Bartlett School of Archi tecture 1969; professor and chair of design studies, State
University of New York, Buffalo 1977-80; chair of art history, University of California,
Santa Cruz 1980-87; chair of architectural history and theory, University of New York
1987. Member, Independent Group from 1952. Died in London, 18 March 1988.

Selected Publications

1960
1969
1971

Further Reading

Banham’s posthumously published collection of essays is the most comprehensive
source of his writings. It includes many of his most influential essays, some biographical
material, and an outstanding appended bibliography. Otherwise, a comprehensive and
straightforward critical overview can be found in Whiteley. Scott is more oblique but
raises many theoretically interesting questions.
Banham, Reyner, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996
Frampton, Kenneth, “Book Review: A Critic Writes,” 21 (1997)

Maxwell, Robert, “Reyner Banham: The Plentitude of Presence,” in edited by
Demetri Porphyrios, New York: St Martin’s Press, and London: Architectural Design,
1981
Scott, Felicity, “Glass Eyes and Cloth Ears,” 49-50 (1996)

Vidler, Anthony, “Peter Reyner Banham Deceased in London,” 214 (1988)
Whiteley, Nigel, “Banham’s ‘Otherness’: Reyner Banham and His Quest for an 33
(1990)

BANK OF CHINA TOWER

Designed by I.M.Pei and Partners; completed 1989 Hong Kong

Notable for its place in the late-20th-century skyline of Hong Kong, the Bank of China
Tower, the headquarters of the Bank in Hong Kong designed by I.M.Pei and Partners and
completed in 1989, is located two blocks away from the old bank building in central
Hong Kong island. Surrounded by major roads on three sides, the tower rises from a
square footprint placed at the center of the small two-acre trapezoidal site. Measuring
1,209 feet to the tip of the twin masts in 70 stories, the tower was the tallest structure
outside the United States at completion.

The building is acclaimed for its elegant form and structural ingenuity. The tower can
be divided into two parts: the curtain-walled shaft resting on a three-story granite-clad
base. The base, with a castellated top, is designed to give the building visual protection
from the chaotic surrounding of major roadways. The allusion to an ancient Chinese city
wall in the design of the base is unmistakable. As the site slopes up from north to south,
the base absorbs the slope and provides the building with two entrances at different
levels. The northern entrance has an arched opening that leads into a barrel-vaulted lobby
where elevator banks are placed for access to the office tower. The southern entrance at
the upper level leads into the banking hall. Located right above the base, the hall is
surrounded on three sides by a floor-to-ceiling curtain wall screened with heavy vertical
mullions. This screen wall, decorated with a diagonally placed squares motif used in
Pei’s Fragrance Hill Hotel in Beijing, helps to make the transition from the heavy base to
the light curtain-walled tower. Above the information counter in the hall is a 14-story
square atrium that brings daylight into the center of the hall. However, because of the

narrowness of the atrium, very little light manages to filter into the hall. Around the
atrium are the offices for the bank, and above these floors are speculative offices. The
boardroom for the bank is located at the apex of the tower under sloped glass roofs
supported by massive steel trusses.

Although the building is set back from Victoria harbor by a block, its shimmering
facade never fails to attract attention from across the water, the principal vantage point of
the famed Hong Kong skyline. This is due entirely to the elegant form of the building.
The tower is made up of a square shaft cut by the two diagonals into four triangular
segments. Each segment terminates at a different height with a large sloping roof. The
effect is said by Pei to be like bundling four sticks of different heights together,
symbolizing rising bamboo stalks with its auspicious connotation in Chinese culture. The
form of the building is said to be the result of a long search by Pei for an appropriate
form for a late-20th-century skyscraper. Dissatisfied with the conventional rectangular
tower of the International Style and the neo-classical pastiche of Postmodernism, Pei
attempts to seek a new form in the Bank of China Tower that is structurally honest and
innovative while aesthetically genuine to its region. Because of the diagonal cut, the
building contains six facades tapering toward the tip, each face covered with silver-
coated reflective glass that catches light from different directions at different times of the
day, resulting in a glittering appearance.

Pei’s tower is similarly important for its structural inventiveness. Designed in
collaboration with Leslie E.Robertson, the main structure consists of four corner
composite columns of reinforced concrete that carry the building load to the ground. In
addition, a central column to support the four segments of the tower is placed between the
top of the building to the 25th floor, at which point the load is transferred to the corners.
The five-column tower is reminiscent of ancient Chinese pagoda forms with a heavy
central column and four supporting corner columns. It is at these corners that both
vertical and lateral loads meet and where vertical, horizontal, and diagonal steel members
meet in the encasing reinforced-concrete columns. Designed to withstand the severe
typhoon winds of Hong Kong, the structural frame was conceived by Robertson as a huge
three-dimensional space frame, a structural solution that is extremely efficient and less
costly than a conventional structural steel frame. In order to express the structure on the
facade, Pei first proposed a curtain-wall system that accentuated the structural frame,
resulting in a series of crosses on the elevations. This proposal was not accepted by the
client, who feared that the crosses might carry negative associations. Pei then modified
the design to recess the horizontal elements of the bracing system and turn them into
steel. This design, explained by Pei as a series of diamonds, seamlessly integrates the
structure with aesthetics.

The meaning of the building’s form has been a subject of intense

speculation in Hong Kong society. The four triangular


Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong,
designed by I.M.Pei

© GreatBuildings.com

shafts of the building resulted in sharp corners. According to the principles and beliefs of

the ancient Chinese art of reading the house form for auspicious or bad influences, these
edges are regarded as exerting malignant forces on the occupants of facing buildings.
Thus, the building is said to have a negative impact on neighboring buildings. For
masters, the corners are like sharp knife blades, and devices must be placed in
surrounding buildings, including the Government House (the residence and office of the
colonial Governor of Hong Kong), to ward off negative influences coming from the
tower.

The taller and more elegant Bank of China Tower has always been compared to the
Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank Headquarters by Norman Foster. However, what Pei has
ultimately achieved in the tower, his last skyscraper, is a modernist statement of
structural integrity and honesty of expression in a multifaceted sculptural form. The
tower remains one of the most prominent landmarks in Hong Kong’s skyline and
represents an innovation in skyscraper form, a key building type in 20th-century urban
architecture.

PUAY-PENG Ho
Feng Shui; Foster, Norman (Great Britain); Hong Kong and Shanghai
Bank, Shanghai; Pei, I.M. (United States); Skyscraper

Further Reading

The most complete architectural account of the building can be found in Jordy. Cannell
and Wiseman contain narratives relating to the building from the architect’s perspective.
Blake and Rastorfer explain the structural design of the building.
Blake, Peter, “Scaling New Heights,” 179, no. 1 (1991)
Cannell, Michael, New York: Carol Southern Books, 1995
Davey, Peter, “Another Prize for Pei,” —-:188, no. 1121 (1990)
Gordon, Douglas E., “Curtain’s Up in Hong Kong,” 79, no. 2 (1990)
Jordy, William H., “Bank of China Tower,” 249, no. 6 (1991)
Rastorfer, Darl, “The Logic of Eccentricity,” 173, no. 10 (1985)
Suner, Bruno, Paris: Hazan, 1988
Suner, Bruno, “Banque de Chine a Hong Kong,” = 270, no. 9 (1990)
Wiseman, Carter, New York: Abrams, 1990

BANK OF LONDON AND SOUTH
AMERICA, BUENOS AIRES

Designed by Clorinda Testa; completed 1966

The Bank of London and South America, located on a congested corner of Bartolomé
Mitre in Buenos Aires, is one of the most significant buildings in Argentina and a
landmark achievement in concrete construction. Designed by Clorindo Testa in
association with SEPRA architects, the introverted building presents a robust concrete
facade that belies a seductive and subdued labyrinthine interior. Set within a context of
formal neoclassical architecture from the 19th century, the cleverly orchestrated design
mediates between the busy and crowded Argentinian streets and the methodical operation
of the bank headquarters. It compliments the urban fabric in a manner that is both
charismatic and controlled.

The building was constructed at a time of tremendous economic turbulence in
Argentina, resulting from political changes internally and the rampant tension across
Latin America that had culminated in the Cuban revolution of 1959. The election of
Arturo Frondizi as president of Argentina in 1958 had introduced sweeping reforms to
the economic, political, and cultural policy of the country, designed to dispel discontent
and to reform the inward-looking Argentine economy. Frondizi instigated an urgent
program of westernization, targeting rapid development through increased levels of
foreign investment and the growth of local industry. The new headquarters for the Bank
of London and South America was the first by-product of this new economic policy. The

building was to represent a rekindling of ties between Britain and Argentina that had
gradually been eroded since the beginning of World War II. As a mark of sincerity
toward this objective, the foundation stone for the building was laid by Prince Philip, the
Duke of Edinburgh, in March 1962.

The building already on the site, the former headquarters of the bank (designed in
1867 by the architects Hunt and Schroeder), was demolished in May 1961. The first stage
of construction was begun in December 1962, and the inauguration of the building took
place in August 1966. The design of the building was the outcome of an invited
competition undertaken by four Argentinian practices between January and May 1960.
The commission was awarded to the well-established local firm SEPRA (Santiago
Sanchez Elia, Fredrico Peralta Ramos, and Alfredo Agostini), who had collaborated with
the local artist and architect Clorindo Testa in their design proposal. Testa, who was more
than a decade younger than the other three members of the design team, had previously
worked with SEPRA on numerous urban projects for the city and became instrumental in
the design and realization of the finished building.

Occupying the corner of a busy intersection in the historical business district of

Buenos Aires, the building responds to the demanding neoclassical context by filling the
rectangular site with a chiseled, extruded block measuring 45 by 75 meters in plan. The
massive structure is hewn from concrete, which, unlike steel, could be produced locally
and required a less-skilled workforce. The two public facades of the building are
protected by monolithic, layered concrete screens that curve outward at the top, providing
a more generous pedestrian area at the base. The fluid concrete walls are punctuated by
seductive rounded openings to allow light to enter. This acts as a curtain providing a
mediation between the narrow street and the cavernous interior of the bank. Behind the
dramatic concrete curtains, which carry the structural load of the massive roof, is another
layer of glazing, which provides a climatic and acoustic barrier from the street. The two
imposing skirts fold back at the corner to reveal the glazed curtain wall that marks the
entrance to the building. A large, unadorned concrete blade wall folds over at the roof
level in the manner of a giant eyelid, enclosing the outdoor foyer space and revealing the
underside of the vaulted canopy, providing a shaded undercarriage as a refuge from the
busy and confined street space beyond. The gesture at the corner addresses not only the
entry but also the opposing buildings of the intersection, disappearing seamlessly into the
urban context.
The building houses 1,500 employees of the bank and provides office space in excess
of 10,000 meters squared. The complex yet sculptural interior layout, dominated by
floating mezzanines and the powerful mass of the circulation cores, distributes the office
space over six levels. Services and car parking are contained in three subterranean floors.
The palette of materials consists of richly formatted reinforced concrete throughout, light
timber trimmings, and a deep red painted finish.
The interior of the building is open and uncluttered by structural supports. The floating
floor slabs are supported by the concrete core of the lift shafts, the separate banks of
stairs, and the sculpted columns that support the exterior walls, tapering at both the base
and apex. This adds a legibility to the structural system and also frees the plan of
intermediate supports, allowing for a fluid and unobstructed spatiality inside the building.
The fluid concrete beams on the underside of the floating intermediate levels taper back
to elegantly house lighting and airconditioning ducts.


The monumental simplicity of the building has played an important role in the context
of architectural history not only in Argentina but across the world. The sculptural
building can be seen as influential to avant-garde movements such as Archigram,
Metabolism, and the Brutalism of Paul Rudolph and, more recently in the curvilinear
geometries of Neil Denari. In the last decade, the building, like Clorindo Testa himself,
has been the subject of international critical reappraisal, elevating the profile of the
building and its architect.

MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Argentina; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Metabolists; Rudolph, Paul (United

States); Testa, Clorindo (Argentina)

Further Reading

Cook, Peter, “Clorinda Testa’s Bank of London and South America, Buenos Aires,”
71 (September 2001)
Cuadra, Manuel, Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2000
Glusberg, Jorge, “Banco de Londres y America del Sud, casa central,” 65 (1984)
Liernur, Jorge Francisco, “The Bank of London and South America Head Office,” 34
(Autumn 1997)

BARCELONA, SPAIN

Barcelona, the capital of the Spanish province of Catalonia, was an epicenter of 20th-
century architectural vanguardism. The city’s geographic position on the northeast face of
the Iberian Peninsula—ostensibly with its back to the Castilian capital of Madrid and its
face toward the Mediterranean countries of Europe and North Africa—has sustained its
cosmopolitan dimensions throughout its history. From the century’s onset and the
separatist-regionalist concepts associated with Catalan Barcelona’s architectural
primacy has endured two dictatorships, the suppression of its people’s native language,
and the dramatic social upheavals associated with industrial expansion and rapid
population growth.

From the mid-19th century, Barcelona’s municipal authorities sought to cope with the
newly industrialized city’s adolescence. The socialist Ildefonso Cerda i Sunyer (1815-76)
created a Haussmannian solution for unifying Barcelona’s Old City with the independent
villages of the periphery (Cerda plan, 1859). He focused on building a new connective
corridor of regularized grids—the district known as the Eixample (“‘extension” or “new
town”)—which he envisioned as the embodiment of the social panorama, where different
classes could coexist harmoniously and nonhierarchically. By the early 20th century, the
plan was deemed obsolete, and an international competition was announced to resolve the
city’s increasingly problematic geographic and demographic expansion. French Beaux-
Arts architect Léon Jaussely (1875-1932) won the competition and presented the city


with a less radical attempt to address the city’s urbanization. This attempt was partially
implemented in 1917. Barcelonese philosopher Eugeni d’Ors (1881-1954) directly
observed the flowering of Catalonian culture during these years and proclaimed the new
Zeitgeist arebirth of ancient Rome’s legacy in the region.

The dynamically autonomous spirit of Catalonian architecture proclaimed itself in a
visual opponent of this heralded classicism: Barcelona’s version of Spanish . With
pronounced Art Nouveau influences combined with regionalist flair in both materials and
construction techniques, Catalan became the province’s most political aesthetic
movement. Antoni y Cornet y Gaudi’s (1852-1926) highly charged, colorful, and poetic
combination of osteomorphic, zoomorphic, and baroque forms challenged the traditional
Herreran architecture that dominated the peninsula’s public commissions, thus asserting
the distinctiveness of Catalonian culture as anti-Madrilefio. Catalan ’s heart was
established along Barcelona’s wide Passeig de Gracia, a major artery leading from the
north corner of the city’s Plaga de Catalunya into, ironically enough, Cerda’s Eixample
district. Here, progressive middle-class patrons, following the lead of Gaudi’s Count
Eusebio Giiell (1847-1918), commissioned private homes from this new generation of
urban architects. The personalized visions of Gaudi’s Casa Batllé (1907), Lluis
Domenéch i Montaner’s Casa Lleé Morera (1906), and Josep Puig i Cadafalch’s Casa
Amattler (1900) contributed expressiveness to an otherwise neoclassical urban sector,
creating the district’s anticontextualist | (Apple of Discord).

One finds among the architects a romantic engagement with medieval vernacular
forms and local construction materials such as brick and ceramic tile, a rhetorical
vocabulary associated with cultural tradition, local topography, climate, and vegetation.
A distinctively Catalonian mode of vaulting was practiced by Gaudi, Doménech, and the
younger Josep Ma Jujol i Gibert (1879-1949): an elasticine fireproof vault comprised of
laminated layers of ceramic tiles bonded together with reinforced concrete that could be
configured into a variety of geometric or biomorphic forms and that could span
considerable widths without structural reinforcement. Jujol’s Church at Vistebella (1923)
near Tarragona and Montserrat Sanctuary (1936) and close to Montferri, abandoned at
the outbreak of Spanish civil war, employed Catalonian vaults in neo-Gothic formations,
combining local brick and ceramics with iron and concrete to result in religious spaces
imbued with poetic references to both God and nation.

Catalan effect on the city lessened in the 1920s, with the death of two of its major
exponents: Gaudi and Doménech (d. 1923). By 1929 a new architectural language
affected the city by virtue of the International Exhibition. This exhibition was dictator
Miguel Primo de Rivera’s (1923-30) reconstitution of an Electrical Industries Exhibition
that had been conceived nearly a decade earlier. Mies van der Rohe’s epoch-making
German Pavilion (1929), built on the city’s acropolis Montjuic, introduced the city to the
Bauhaus idiom. Farther up the hill, Poble Espanyol (1928) presented the same exhibition
audience with an “ideal Spanish village,” an amalgamation of the peninsula’s traditional
architecture and the manifestation of the Viennese Camillo Sitte’s urban planning
schemes. The coexistence of structural purity and folkloric vernacular would reverberate
in Barcelona’s architecture for much of the century.

The 1930s saw the dissolution of Rivera’s dictatorship, the institution of a
new state government (the Second Republic, 1931-39), and the

reestablishment of a semiautonomous Catalonian government, the


Generalitat (1932-39). The latter fostered an acceptance of Republican
ideals and created a climate hospitable to Catalonian architects interested
in using the state’s ideology as the basis for urban projects. Many of these
young builders were part of the Grupo de Arquitectos y Técnicos
Espafioles para la Arquitectura Contemporanea (GATEPAC)—

Casa Albert Lledo i Morera, Barcelona,
designed by Lluis Domenéch
Montaner (1905)

Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan

the Spanish wing of the Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne (CLAM) and the
Comité International pour la Réalisation des Problémes d’ Architecture Contemporaine
(CIRPAC)—which emerged with four distinctive regional groups: East, North, West, and
South. Grup d’Artistes i Técnics Catalans pe Progrés de l’Arquitectra Contemporania
(GATCPAC), the Barcelona-based East group, was arguably the most influential of them
all, establishing direct and enduring connections with its European counterparts to the
extent that Le Corbusier himself assisted in creating the Macia plan (1935), a massive

and radical project for reorganizing this wor!
high-density courtyard housing. GATCPAC
allowed the young architects to construct the d

ing-class city into a communal utopia of
’s seven-story Casa Bloc (1936, altered)
istinctive type of urban dwelling associated

with the Macia plan and Le Corbusier’s housing.

Josep Lluis Sert (1902-83), later the dean of Harvard University’s Graduate School of
Design, inaugurated GATCPAC’s rationalism both with his Muntaner Apartment
Building (1931), a variation on the theme of balancing the private and the public, and
most markedly with his Dispensario Central Antituberculoso (1938, by Sert, Joan
Subirana, and Josep Torres i Clavé), a leading exemplar of hygienic modernism and
architectural economy that made use of traditional Catalonian vaulting. Sert, who had
been an assistant to Le Corbusier in Paris from 1929 to 1931, closely emulated the
refined proportional relationships, sense of color, and texture that epitomized the Swiss
architect’s works. Sert’s Spanish Pavilion at the 1937 Exposition Internationale des Artes
et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne in Paris—which housed Picasso’s and populist
imagery in photomontages and other visual media—introduced the internationa.
architectural community to the group’s dialectic and the Second Republic’s liberalist
stance. Despite GATCPAC’s visionary aims of urbanistic reform and their ability to
disseminate their ideals through the magazine (1931-37), resources were significantly
limited during the period, and thus the promise of socially driven rationalism remained
primarily a Utopian dream and not an actuality.

Spain’s civil war (1936-39) devastated the Iberian Peninsula and especially resulted in
destruction in the nation’s eastern provinces; in Barcelona, churches were damaged or
completely destroyed and building projects effectively halted. The victorious
authoritarian New Régime of General Franco (1939-75) associated the country’s various
avant-garde movements with left-wing political sensibilities, and subsequently, modernist
movement architecture was actively discouraged. In the nation’s urban centers, the new
official architecture prescribed to the legacy of grandiose neoclassical academicism; in
rural Spain, post-civil war architecture hearkened back to a whimsical folk vernacular.
Sert and other vanguard architects exiled themselves from their homeland; those who
chose to stay either sustained themselves by constructing “patriotic” buildings that
followed the state’s doctrines and guidelines, subsisted on the limited patronage of the
private sector, or stopped building altogether.

The reclusive José Antonio Coderch y de Sentmenat (1913-84) found work designing
Mediterranean villas of a regionalist and at times Expressionistic bent, such as his Ugalde
House (1952; Caldetes, Barcelona), and also sought vernacular approaches to Barcelona’s
explosive population growth in apartment buildings, such as the Pescadores Block
(1954), constructed for retired seamen in Barceloneta, a working-class port area of the
city. During the 1950s and 1960s, Coderch consistently developed an architectural idiom
that at its best was a subtle response to modernist “white architecture” harmonized with
local expression, climate, landscape, and culture.

Sert maintained contacts with architects and patrons in Spain, especially with those in
Catalonia and the Balearic Islands. His studio (1956) for the Surrealist painter Joan Miro,
located on the Mediterranean island of Majorca outside Palma, united the region’s
whitewashed rubble surfaces and sun-shielding perforated grilles with the formal
vocabulary of Le Corbusier and the hieroglyphic shapes of Miré.


Spain’s isolationist tendencies dissipated during the 1950s, and interactions with
democratic nations invigorated the nation’s economy. Barcelona’s Group R (1952-58)
was founded in conjunction with the Colegio de Arquitectos de Catalufia y Baleares’s
municipal competition to tackle the city’s constant housing problems. Josep M* Sostres
Malaquer (1915-84) was the theoretical leader of the group and an ardent admirer of
Gaudi’s work. His own Casa Agusti (1955) in the nearby resort town of Sitges combined
a regional sensitivity to its seaside context with an understated rationalism, resulting in a
structure delicately imbricated with its nearby garden and protected by a double facade
from the sun’s penetrating heat. Group R mem-bers Oriol Bohigas Guardiola (1939—) and
Antonio Moragas Gallissa (1913-85) entered into an exchange regarding the future of
Catalonian architecture and whether it should prescribe to the rationalist or neoclassical
idiom. The group’s formal interchanges resulted in an outlook that called for Catalonian
architects to reject neoclassicism because of its associations with Francoism and instead
to promote a regionalist architecture emerging from modernism, a reinterpretation of
craftsmanship and materials, of generic urban structures, and of avant-garde spatial
configurations. Group R espoused the belief that architecture should have a socia.
conscience to resolve sociological problems, and the group was particularly inclined
toward the rationalist architecture of the exiled Sert, the vernacular approach of Coderch,
and the neorealism of the Milanese. The group’s most noteworthy structure, Gustavo Gili
Publishing House (1961), constructed in the interior of the Eixample for vanguard
publisher Gustavo Gili by Bassé and Gili, made use of an unadorned permeable glass
membrane wall raised on red and surmounted by a landscaped rooftop garden with
pergolas.

By the late 1950s, Francoist Spain had entered a period of sizable economic expansion
and unchecked urban development. Barcelona, Madrid, and Bilbao became the hubs of
this growth, and their historic centers and peripheral suburbs faced the same architectura.
malaise that plagued many similar industrialized cities. Group R had grown significantly
larger and eventually was reconstituted as the so-called Barcelona School, a less forma
group of architects whose stylistic influences were markedly eclectic: rationalism,
Brutalism, neorealism, and Neo-Expressionism. Architects Bohigas, Josep Martorel
Codina (1925—), and others came to reject modernism’s Utopian premises for a “poetic
realist” regionalism—an architecture that emphasized traditional building practices and
methods and a pragmatic knowledge of local history. The Barcelona School architects
sought to redefine and reinvigorate the role of architecture in its new socioeconomic and
technical context; the school thus became more politicized—more engaged with the
Milanese theoretical position that architecture should be a catalyst for significant social
change and that architectural practice should return to its traditional craft values. Bohigas
promoted the group’s ideas in a number of written works, including his influentia
manifesto “Cap a una arquitectura realista” (1961; “Toward a Realist Architecture”).
MBM, Bohigas’s partnership with Martorell and British expatriate David Mackay (1933—
), focused on urban housing projects in the 1960s; their Casa del Pati Housing Block
(1964) and Avenida Meridiana Flats (1965) evidenced the prominent features that have
come to define the Barcelona School: tectonicity, tactile sensitivity, the so-called deep
plan, communal spaces, and sun-protective patios.

Coderch developed relationships with the international community of architects called
Team X, which had emerged from CIAM in 1956. He sought new humanistic solutions to


urban domestic configurations in the 1960s with such projects as his Casa Uriach (1962)
and Casa Luque (1963), which introduced an especially marked sensitivity to the issue of
the privacy in their jagged plans, vertical window recesses, and prominent use of
Venetian blinds. His nonresidential Trade Office Building (1965) revealed his admiration
for Mies van der Rohe’s glass skyscraper project of 1921. From his Girasol Building
(1964) in Madrid and throughout the remainder of his life, Coderch also was engaged in
rethinking modern urban apartment projects by creating humanistic variations on the
theme, in which he sought a unified complex of distinctively autonomous apartments, a
quasi-ruralization of urban life (e.g. Calle Raset, 1974; Paseo Manuel Girona, 1975).
Nearly half a century of authoritarian rule ended with General Franco’s death in 1975,
and change became the nation’s credo. A new democratically elected government sought
the partial restoration of Spain’s historical autonomies and the creation of new public
authorities, including the Generalitat of Catalonia. Thus, the province’s distinctive culture
was revitalized, its regional language was no longer outlawed, and new museums to its
native sons were constructed. In 1976 Barcelona’s municipal officials created a new
schema for the city’s rehabilitation, the General Metropolitan Plan, in 1974 the Barcelona
School’s published its first issue, and from 1976 until 1980 Bohigas was chairman of
the local school of architects. MBM continued to address Barcelona’s social concerns in
such projects as their more Brutalist-inspired Thau School (1975), a collaborative-based
educational environment rooted in a more centralized and open plan of multiuse spaces.
Ricardo Bofill’s (1939—-) multidisciplinary studios, Taller de Arquitectura, founded in
Barcelona in 1962 and Paris in 1971, addressed urban renewal problems with a more
fervent ideological underpinning. The visual manifestation of their aims, Walden 7
(1975) in Sant Just Desvern, named after B.F.Skinner’s behavioralist utopia, consisted of
400 multileveled flats of various sizes in 12-story concrete towers prescribing to the
Barcelona School’s deep plan and sheathed in the region’s terra-cotta tiles.
In 1981 the Generalitat named Bohigas the director of urbanism for the City of
Barcelona and in so doing solidified the effect of the Barcelona School’s new typology
for urban renewal. He used the 1976 master plan as the basis for creating regulated
densities and for identifying the civic areas most in need of revitalization, although he
questioned the earlier plan’s implementation and rejected its motorway designs. His new
strategy included the establishment of a network of communal spaces—parks, plazas, and
public facilities—threaded into the city’s densest neighborhoods, or . Most important,
Bohigas advocated a pragmatic solution—a balance between modernity and historica.
memory—to Barcelona’s urban problems by stressing the importance of collaboration
between civil servants and consultants, by selecting specific architects to resolve specific
problems, and by emphasizing local design projects over total civic transformation. The
first so-called “hard” square), Alberto Viaplana (1933—) and Helio Pifion’s (1942-)
Plaza dels Paisos Catalans (or Plaza de la Estacion de Sants, 1983), was constructed as a
flat urban area with no protective boundaries and no contextualist references to the
surrounding architecture; instead, the minimalist design acknowledged the site’s
limitations and stark immediacy. Emblematically, Mies van der Rohe’s Barcelona
Pavilion was painstakingly reconstructed on Montjuic by Ignasi de Sold-Morales,
Fernando Ramos, and Cristian Cirici.
Barcelona’s selection as host to the 1992 Olympic Games focused international
attention on the city’s renovation projects, including Santiago Calatrava’s Bac de Roda


Bridge (1987), Esteban Bonell and Fracesc Rius’s Horta Cycle Track (1984), Araka
Isozaki’s Sant Jordi Palace (1991), Norman Foster’s Coll serola Telecommunications
Tower (1992), and Richard Meier’s Museum of Contemporary Art (1995). Much of the
city’s water-front was rebuilt, Montjuic Park was remodeled, and new roads were
developed around the periphery. Municipal government supported these sizable projects,
and a sense of optimism pervaded among many of the city’s architects, including MBM,
who designed Novia Icaria (Olympic Village, 1992), an attempt to reconcile the 1859
Cerda plan with the renovation of the city’s formerly industrial coastal belt. Named after
a 19th-century socialist group, Novia Icaria became the culmination of Bohigas’s efforts
to redefine the city by balancing tradition and modernity.
KELI RYLANCE
Bofill, Ricardo (Spain); Calatrava, Santiago (Spain); Coderch y de
Sentmenat, José Antonio (Spain); Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture
Moderne (CIAM, 1927-); Gaudi, Antoni (Spain); Miralles, Enric, and
Carme Pinos (Spain); Moneo, Rafael (Spain); Sert, Josep Lluis (United
States)

Further Reading

Baldellou, Miguel Angel, and Antén Capitel, (Vol. 40 of ), Madrid: Espasa Calpe,
1995
Curtis, William J.R., 3rd edition, London: Phaidon, 1996
Flores, Carlos, and Xavier Giiell, Barcelona: Caja de Arquitectos Fundacion, 1996
Gonzalez, Antoni, and Raquel Lacuesta, Barcelona: Editorial Gustavo Gili, 1999
Hughes, Robert, New York: Random House, 1992
Mackay, David, New York: Rizzoli, 1989

Montaner, Josep M*, Barcelona: Editorial Gustavo Gili, 1999
Rovira i Gimeno, Josep M., Barcelona: Edicions de la Universitat Politécnica de
Catalunya, 1987
Saliga, Pauline, and Martha Thorne (editors), Chicago: The Art Institute of
Chicago, 1992
Sola-Morales, Ignacio, and Anton Capitel, Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1998

Zabalbeascoa, Anatxu, New York: Rizzoli, 1992

BARNES, EDWARD LARRABEE 1915

Architect, United States

The career of Edward Larrabee Barnes has encapsulated and contributed to the course
of modernism across the United States. Barnes entered the architectural profession in
concurrence with the arrival of Walter Gropius and Marcel Breuer into this country in
1937. He closed his office in 1994, just as a reinvention of modernism appeared to be

launched. During the intervening years, Barnes crafted an array of private houses notable
for their clarity in plan, volume, and landscaping. The houses exist as a series of
education! and cultural buildings, instructive for the sensitivity of their siting and
responsiveness to a larger context. Barnes’s body of work also includes several office
buildings, note- worthy for their dedication to Louis Sullivan’s theme of the tall building,
artistically considered.

Barnes was born in Chicago in 1915, to parents who were successful in their chosen
careers of law and writing. He attended preparatory school in the East, and received his
undergraduate education at Harvard College. Following a brief teaching stint, Barnes
returned to Harvard to study under Gropius and Breuer, graduating in 1942 with a
master’s degree in architecture.

Barnes’s wartime career included a year in Washington, D.C., at the Division of
Defense Housing and service as an architect with the Naval Reserve at Hunter’s Point in
San Francisco. At the close of the war, Barnes joined the offices of architect William
W.Wurster in San Francisco, and industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss in Los Angeles.
With Dreyfuss, Barnes designed a prefabricated house for Consolidated Vultee Aircraft,
scheduled for mass production. In 1949 Barnes returned East with his wife, Mary, and
opened an office in New York City.

Like a number of his Harvard contemporaries including Henry Cobb, Ulrich Frazen,
John Johansen, Philip Johnson, and I.M.Pei, Barnes entered the profession during a time
of rapid economic expansion, and increased demand for new construction at all levels,
including residential, institutional, and commercial. For Barnes and the others, the
national growth combined with talent, personal connections, and luck led to rapid
recognition and robust practices by the mid-1950s.

Barnes’s body of work, while infused with a modernist acknowledgment of the
specificities of each project, exudes no dogmatic or easily definable style. His legacy is a
dedication to an overall organizing idea derived from the complexities of each
commission, distilled in a rationally ordered plan.

The Osborn House (1949-51) in Salisbury, Connecticut, typifies a group of early
Barnes houses, with a site plan that creates a distinct precinct within an open meadow,
augmented by carefully considered connections between individual rooms and the
adjacent landscape. In time Barnes extended this strategy to increasingly individualized
spaces, suggesting villages with individual house designs. The plan of the Cowles House
(1959-63) in Wayzata, Minnesota, alludes to a farm assemblage, while sharp-peaked
roofs and bold modulations of surface and void simultaneously separate the residence
from the adjacent acreage.

By the late 1950s, Barnes had developed a portfolio of institutional work, with the
completion of two children’s summer camps for the Fresh Air Fund (Camp Bliss and
Camp Anita, 1953-55, Fishkill, New York). At the Haystack Mountain School of Crafts
(1958-63) in Deer Isle, Maine, Barnes combined a bold master plan—running down the
site’s 90-foot slope—with a typological layout and articulation of separate building
elements. Although the individual buildings at Haystack are one-story volumes
constructed of unfinished wood boards, their geometry and the system that orders their
arrangement direct attention to both the natural site and the school as a community,
making the experience of place an emotional and practical one. While Barnes described
his overriding concept as the construction of “a typical Maine fishing village” (minutes of


the Board of Trustees, Haystack Mountain School of Crafts, 26 July 1959), the simplicity
and inevitability of such a conceit is the product of the architect’s thoughtful design
decisions. In 1994 Haystack Mountain School of Crafts received the American Institute
of Architects (AIA) award for an exemplary American building of 25 years of age or
more. It remains the masterwork of his career. Following Haystack, Barnes designed a
host of buildings for educational institutions, including dormitories at St. Paul’s School
(1959-61 and 1969) in Concord, New Hampshire; faculty apartments and a building for
the arts (1963-71) at Emma Willard School in Troy, New York; and master plans for the
State University of New York at Purchase (1966-68) and Yale University (1968—78).

With the Walker Art Center (1966-71, addition in 1984) in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Barnes first tackled the program of an art museum; he arranged seven galleries and three
roof terraces around a central service core. The galleries, individualized by their
proportions and apertures, defer in authority to the artwork. Here, the architect
emphasized movement through space over discrete destinations. At the Dallas Museum
of Art (1978-83, additions in 1984 and 1993), a central passageway lends access to an
array of museum functions, accommodating expansion and the distinct schedules of
galleries, public spaces, and auxiliary operations. The linear arrangement reduces the
scale of the overall enterprise and, as with the early houses, allows the development of
independent relationships between interior galleries and exterior gardens.

Although Barnes was lauded in his commercial work, it was more for his articulation
of surface than for his design plan or volume; two towers stand out for the clarity of their
overall design. The New England Merchants National Bank (1963-71) in Boston,
Massachusetts, addresses a sloping site and a complex of disparate civic buildings at its
base, including the Old State House and the new city hall (1962-67, Kallmann
McKinnell and Knowles). The articulation of the crown expresses the presence of a
restaurant and an executive office suite. In between, a tight surface patterned by ribbons
of window and wall convey repetitive office floors. At the IBM tower (1973-83) in New
York City, a similar scheme provides for an entrance base, a clear tower shaft (here
sheathed in green granite), and a differentiated top. At the entrance, Barnes carved out a
triangle-shaped plaza from the first three floors, at the corner of Madison Avenue and
57th Street, over which he cantilevered the tower’s remaining 40 stories. The 1973
zoning law, which allowed increases in overall square footage of commercial buildings in
exchange for public amenities, made possible a greenhouse park planted with dramatic
copses of bamboo on the southwestern half of the parcel.

Barnes was widely recognized for his work and received awards from the AIA for the
Walker Museum of Art (Minneapolis, 1972), the Hecksher House (1977), and the private
home in Dallas (1986) in addition to the AIA Firm Award in 1980. He was elected a
fellow of the AIA in 1966, of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1978, and
of the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1991. Harvard awarded him a 350th
Anniversary Medal in 1986 and an Alumni Lifetime Achievement Award from the
Graduate School of Design in 1993. In addition to teaching stints at Pratt Institute, Yale,
and Harvard, Barnes served as a director of the Municipal Art Society, the American
Academy in Rome, and the Museum of Modern Art, where he remains a lifetime trustee.

Although he associated with partners over the years—namely, Alistair Bevington,
Percy Keck, and John M.Y.Lee—Barmes remained the signature designer of his
eponymous practice during its full 45 years. In his office, he trained a number of the


leading American architects of the late 20th century, including Ivan Chermayeff,
Alexander Cooper, Bruce Fowle, Charles Gwathmey, Toshiko Mori, Laurie Olin,
Giovanni Pasanella, Jaquelin Robertson, and Robert Siegel.

Writing in early in his career, Barnes describes his design process as rooted in
exploration and discovery, followed by synthesis and discipline. He demands
consideration of function—both practical and psychological; site—both immediate
conditions and the larger environment; structure—whose implementation requires clarity
without dominance; and finally, the lasting legacy of the individual work. For all these
concerns, Barnes seeks unity. He notes, “We do not solve our problems by sheer genius
or sudden inspiration, but by a process of exploration and analysis” (Barnes, 1959).
Throughout his career, Barnes remains true to these conditions, producing a body of work
respectful of its programmatic role, expressive of its materials, structure, and volume,
disciplined in its articulation, and evocative of its larger humanistic purpose.

AMY S.WEISSER
Breuer, Marcel (United States); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Johnson,
Philip (United States); Pei, I.M. (United States); Sullivan, Louis (United
States)

Biography

Born in Chicago, 15 April 1915. Studied at Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts under Marcel Breuer and Walter Gropius; bachelor’s degree 1938;
master’s degree in architecture 1942. Married Mary Elizabeth Coss 1944:1 child.
Lieutenant, United States Naval Reserves 1942-47. Private practice, New York from
1949; director, Municipal Art Society of New York from 1960; member, Urban Design
Council of New York 1972-76; trustee, Museum of Modern Art, New York from 1975;
Westchester Planning Board, New York from 1975; member, advisory council, Trust for
Public Land from 1984. Architectural design critic and lecturer, Pratt Institute, Brooklyn,
New York 1954-59; taught at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 1957-64;
trustee, American Academy in Rome 1963-78; member of the visiting committee,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 1965-68; taught at the Graduate
School of Design, Harvard University from 1978; Thomas Jefferson Professor of
Architecture, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 1980. Fellow, American Institute of
Architects 1966; associate 1969 and academician 1974, National Academy of Design;
fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences 1978.

Selected Works

Osborn House and Studio, Salisbury, Connecticut, 1951
Camp Bliss, Fishkill, New York, 1955
Camp Anita, Fishkill, New York, 1955
Dormitories, St. Paul’s School, Concord, New Hampshire, 1961, 1969
Haystack Mountain School of Arts and Crafts, Deer Isle, Maine, 1963
Cowles House, Wayzata, Minnesota, 1963

Master Plan and Major Buildings, State University of New York, Purchase, 1968
Music, Art, and Library Buildings and Faculty Apartments, Emma Willard

School, Troy, New York, 1971

New England Merchants’ National Bank Building, Boston, 1971

Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, 1972; addition, 1984

Chicago Botanical Gardens, Glencoe, Illinois, 1976

Farnum, Vanderbilt, and Durfee Halls Renovation, Yale University, IBM World
Headquarters, New York, 1983 Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1978

Dallas Museum of Art, 1983; additions, 1984, 1993

Private House, Dallas, 1984

Selected Publications

“The Design Process,” 5 (1959)
“Control of Graphics Essential to Good Shopping Center Design,” (June 1962)
“Remarks on Continuity and Change,” 9/10 (1965)

Further Reading

Barnes, Edward Larrabee, Katonah, New York: The Katonah Gallery, 1987
Campbell, Robert, “Evaluation: A Classic That Retains Its Appeal,” 78 (February 1989)
Crosbie, Michael J., “8 over 80,” 76 (July 1995)

New York: Rizzoli, 1994

BARRACAN, LUIS 1902-88

Architect, Mexico

Luis Barragan was at the forefront of a generation of Mexican architects who followed
a fascination with European functionalist design; they endeavored to reconcile
modernism with the indigenous architecture of Mexico, in order to express a distinct
sense of place.

Barragan is best known for a small body of post-World War II buildings and
landscapes that merge modern materials and minimalist cubic form, with discreet
references to local culture, personal memory, figurative surrealist painting, and Mexican
and Mediterranean vernacular forms. These works are marked by frequent use of brilliant
saturated colors (pinks, blues, yellows, and reds are prevalent) and by a sophisticated
handling of space, texture, siting, and natural light. His most significant projects involved
speculative designs for residential subdivisions, and private houses for wealthy clients.
Among the former are the seminal Jardines del Pedregal (1945-50), which he called his
most important work; Las Arboledas (1958-59); and Los Clubes (1963-64), all in

Mexico City. Among his private houses, key examples include the Gonzalez Luna and
Cristo houses (1928 and 1929) in Guadalajara, his private residence in Mexico City’s
Tacubaya district (1947), and houses for Eduardo Prieto Lopez (1950), Antonio Galvez
(1959), Folke Egerstrom (1967-68), and Francisco Gilardi (1976), all built in Mexico
City as well. He also built other projects, including small chapels, such as the one for the
Capuchinas Sacramentarias del Purisimo Corazén de Maria (1953-55) again in the
Tacubaya district. There were also multifamily housing units, such as the apartment
house he designed with José Creixell and Max Cetto for Mexico City’s Plaza Melchor
Ocampo (1940); public sculptures, such as the Satellite City Towers (1957), with Mathias
Goeritz, for Mario Pani’s Ciudad Satélite subdivision north of the City; and semi-public
gardens, as those for the Hotel Pierre Marquez (1955) in Acapulco.

Barragan was born in Guadalajara to a large, wealthy, devoutly Roman Catholic
family. Following long stints on his family’s cattle ranch near the Jaliscan village of
Mazamitla, and preparatory school in Guadalajara, he received his civil engineering
degree in 1925 from Guadalajara’s Escuela Libre de Ingenieros. He later completed his
course in architecture there under Agustin Basave, who was a disciple of the French
Beaux-Arts master Hippolyte Taine, but the school closed shortly before his degree was
awarded. This formal study was followed by travel to Europe. In 1924-26, during the
first of two trips, Barragan was especially impressed by visits to the Alhambra, and the
Parisian where he first encountered works by Le Corbusier (whom he met there) and
French author, illustrator, and landscape gardener Ferdinand Bac. In 1930-31, he visited
Bac at his home, Les Colombiéres, in Menton, on the French Cote d’Azur. Bac
encouraged his interest in the poetic use of vernacular architecture and nostalgia. The
visual impressions and contacts he gained on these voyages were to nourish Barragan’s
thought process and practice for many years to come.

Barragan’s career can be divided neatly into three periods. The first lasted from 1927-
36, and included his work in and around Guadalajara. During this time, he completed
work on a city park, Parque de la Revolucién (1935), with his brother Juan José, and a
dozen villas and small rental houses. The houses, such as those for Efrain Gonzalez Luna
and Gustavo Cristo, are thick walled and cubic, with clay tile roofs, deep-set round-
arched voids, and complicated spatial arrangements, and reflect a formal vocabulary
indebted to Moorish and Jaliscan vernacular sources, and to Bac’s illustrated books and

(both published in 1925).

In 1936 Barragan moved to Mexico City, then booming after the cessation of a long
and devastating civil war. Over the next few years there, he built some 30 small houses
and apartment buildings. Most of these were speculative ventures that he financed
himself, and most were done in collaboration with other architects, such as Creixell and
Cetto. Like much of the architecture then being built in Mexico City, Barragan’s thin-
walled, glass and concrete buildings, with their roof terraces and factory windows,
borrowed heavily from the work of Le Corbusier. Buildings such as these, built by
Barragan, Juan O’Gorman, and others, were seen by many progressive Mexicans as
appropriately quick, cheap, efficient, and modern, and free of the historical and
ideological baggage of earlier revival styles.

During the early 1940s, Barragan slackened his professional pace. He
spent time designing a group of private gardens at his home in Tacubaya,

and on property that he had acquired in the rugged lava fields south of

7]

Mexico City. This last area, known as El Pedregal, or “the rocky place,’
provided the inspiration and the setting for the 865-acre Jardines del
Pedregal, the first major work of Barragan’s third and final phase. At El
Pedregal, he and his staff worked with or took inspiration from many
others, including Max Cetto, sculptor Mathias Goeritz, painters Diego
Rivera and Dr. Atl, financier José Alberto Bustamante, city planner Carlos
Contreras, and photographer Armando Salas Portugal—and designed
roads and water systems, public plazas and sculpture, demonstration
houses and gardens, and launched an extensive print and broadcast
advertising campaign. Roads, gardens, and modern, flat-roofed houses—
some bearing subtle, formal similarity to the walled courts and high-
beamed ceilings of Mexican colonial-era convents and haciendas—were
fitted

Cristo House, Guadalajara, Jalisco,
designed by Luis Barragan (1929)

© Barragan Foundation,
Switzerland/Artists Rights Society,
New York

amidst the swirling stone eddies and distinctive native vegetation of the site. Many of
Mexico’s best-known modern architects, including Francisco Artigas, Enrique del Moral,
and Felix Candela, built houses there. Barragan was criticized at times by his Mexican
colleagues for his work’s “scenography” and diversion from functional and politically

progressive concerns, but during the early 1950s El Pedregal became a substantia
financial and international critical success.

Barragan’s subsequent projects, such as Las Arboledas and the Egerstrom and Gilardi
houses, carry the themes explored in El Pedregal forward. In them, one finds more
evolved versions echoing the play of light, shadow, water, and wall, its dramatic use of
color and varied textures, its startling juxtapositions of the old and the new, the local and
the imported, and the natural and the man-made. These designs capture scenography at its
best, stage sets for unspecified yet solemn rituals, thick with silence, time, and gravitas.

Although much of Barragan’s best work, including the Jardines del Pedregal, has been
insensitively modified or destroyed, his influence continues to be wide ranging. Many
younger Mexican architects, including Ricardo Legorreta, have treated his forms and
signature colors as the basis of a distinctly Mexican modern architecture. Outside
Mexico, designers as diverse as Tadao Ando and Mark Mack have attributed his work as
a source of inspiration.

In 1976 the Museum of Modern Art in New York presented a retrospective exhibition
of his work. This honor came as he was completing his last projects prior to suffering a
long and debilitating illness and brought him renewed attention after two decades of
neglect. Four years later, in 1980, he was awarded the Pritzker Prize.

KEITH L.EGGENER
Ando, Tadao (Japan); Candela, Felix (Mexico); Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret,
Charles-Edouard) (France); Legorreta, Ricardo (Mexico); Mexico; Mexico

City, Mexico; Moral, Enrique del (Mexico); O’Gorman, Juan (Mexico)

Biography

Born in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 9 March 1902. Studied engineering in Guadalajara
and received degree in 1925; self-taught architect; traveled in Spain and France 1924-26;
attended Le Corbusier’s lectures, Paris 1931-32. Practiced in Guadalajara 1927-36;
worked in and near Mexico City from 1936; concentrated on planning studies and real
estate 1940-45; founder and director, with José Alberto Bustamante, Jardines del
Pedregal de San Angel, SA, Mexico City 1945-52; co-founder, Las Arboledas
Residential Zone Foundation, Mexico City 1957; co-founder, La Hacienda Golf Club,
Mexico City 1958; partner, with Raul Ferrera, Luis Barragan y Raul Ferrera Arquitectos,
Mexico City from 1976. Member, Mexican Academy of Architects; fellow, American
Institute of Architects 1984; honorary member, American Academy of Arts and Letters
1984. Pritzker Prize 1980. Died in Mexico, 22 November 1988.

Selected Works

Gonzalez Luna House, Guadalajara, 1928
Cristo House, Guadalajara, 1929
Parque de la Revolution, Guadalajara (with Juan José Barragan), 1935
Apartment Building, Plaza Melchior Ocampo, Mexico City (with José Creixell), 1940
Barragan House, Tacubaya, Mexico City, 1947

Eduardo Prieto Lopez House, El Pedregal, Mexico City, 1950
Jardines del Pedregal, Mexico City, 1950
Capuchinas Sacramentarias del Purismo Corazén de Maria, Tlalpan, Mexico City,
1955
Gardens for the Hotel Pierre Marquez, Acapulco, 1955
Satellite City Towers, Queretaro Highway, Mexico City (with Mathias Goeritz), 1957
Antonio Galvez House, Mexico City, 1959
Las Arboledas, E] Pedregal, Mexico City, 1959
Los Clubes Master Plan, Public Landscaping, and Building Code, Mexico City, 1964
Folke Egerstrom House, Los Clubes, Mexico City, 1968
Francisco Gilardi House, Tacubaya, Mexico City (with Raul Ferrera and

Alberto Chauvet), 1976

Selected Publications

“Gardens for Environment—Jardines del Pedregal,” (April 1952)
“The Construction and Enjoyment of a Garden Accustoms People to Beauty, to Its
Instinctive Use, Even to Its Accomplishment,” in 1968
“Luis Barragan,” interview with Jorge Salvat, (Autumn 1980)

Further Reading

Ambasz, Emilio, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1976
de Anda, Enrique (editor), Bogata, Colombia: Escala, 1989
Eggener, Keith, “Postwar Modernism in Mexico: Luis Barragan’s Jardines del Pedregal
and the International Discourse on Architecture and Place,” 58/2 (1999)
Gonzalez Gortazar, Fernando (editor), Mexico City: Consejo Nacional Para la
Cultura y las Artes, 1994
Noelle, Louise, Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1996
Riggen Martinez, Antonio, Milan: Electra, 1996; as translated by Christina
Bennett, New York: Monacelli Press, 1996
Rispa, Rat (editor), | New York: Princeton Architectural Press, and London: Thames
and Hudson, 1996
San Martin, Ignacio (editor), Tempe: Arizona State University Center for Latin
American Studies, 1997

BAUHAUS

Often misunderstood as a single entity with a consistent program and body of work, the
Bauhaus was an educational program that occupied three successive sites in post-World

War I Germany: Weimar (1919-25), Dessau (1925-32), and Berlin (1932-33).
Distinguished by its changes in location, direction, and faculty, the program’s turbulent
history is reflected in the various articulations of the Bauhaus program that, although not
wholly distinct from one another, appeared as separate phases of development.

The first Bauhaus (literally, “house of building”), located in the legendary city of
German arts and letters, Weimar, was founded by the German architect Walter Gropius in
April 1919, several months after the surrender of Germany and the formation of the
Weimar Republic. Taking up residence in a building that formerly housed Henri van de
Velde’s School of Arts and Crafts, the “First Proclamation of the Weimar Bauhaus”
(officially known as the Staatliches Bauhaus Weimar) declared the formation of a new
school dedicated to the arts and crafts, a “new guild of craftsmen, without class
distinctions which raise an arrogant barrier between craftsman and artist.” Modeled on a
medieval guild, Gropius’s “new guild” would harbor artists and craftsmen who would
“together...conceive and create the new building of the future, [a new building that] will
embrace architecture, sculpture and painting in one unity and which will rise one day
toward heaven from the hands of a million workers like the crystal symbol of a new
faith.” The frontispiece of the program, a woodcut designed by Lyonel Feininger,
constituted an emblem of this new faith. Depicting a Gothic cathedral with three stars
radiating the light of the heavens, the symbol hearkened back to another age, an age
idealized in the literature and art of German Romanticism.

A director of the revolutionary group Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst (Work Council for Art),
Gropius’s early appointments to the Weimar faculty, or “Council of Masters,” indicate
his vision of an internationalist, pluralist program in which students and faculty alike
could share their views and aspirations for artistic and social revolution. Including
Gerhard Marcks, Adolf Meyer, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Georg Muche, Paul Klee, Oskar
Schlemmer, Lyonel Feininger, Johannes Itten, Lothar Schreyer, and Wassily Kandinsky,
the Bauhaus masters were supplemented by an “Honorary Council of Masters,” a group
whose members were drawn from countries across the whole of Europe. Ranging in age
from 17 to 40, students were from the north and south of Germany and Austria,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and the Baltic countries; two-thirds were men, and half had
served in the army.

Curricular studies included mural painting, sculpture, theater, dance, and music.
Reflecting the program’s affiliation with medieval guilds, students developed from
apprentices to journeymen in order to finally reach the title of “Master.” In accordance
with Gropius’s vision, the early years of the Bauhaus were marked by the engagement of
a variety of movements, styles, and pedagogical methods, including German
Expressionism, Dada, Russian Suprematism, and Constructivism. Aptly characterized by
Wolfgang Pehnt as an “expressionist art school,” the Weimar Bauhaus did in fact exhibit
a pronounced bias toward Romantic themes, including social unity, subjective artistic
expression, vernacular Christianity, and collective artistic expression, a tendency that was
modified over the course of the program’s evolution. The presence of Johannes Itten, a
practitioner of the Perozorastrian religious sect, further exaggerated this view. Charged
with teaching the required preliminary course Itten espoused individual expression over
collective responsibility while introducing his students to a cultlike way of living that
depended on the elevation of subjective visions, the rigors of individual self-discipline,
and bodily and spiritual purification. On the other hand, the empirical visualization


techniques and allegorical figuration of Paul Klee and the Russian painter Wassily
Kandinsky, along with the other Bauhaus masters, mediated Itten’s influence.

Internal and external criticisms of the Bauhaus, a school never fully adopted by either
the citizens of Weimar or the government of the state of Thuringia (where Weimar is
located), were continual problems for Gropius, who spent most of his time defending the
program as the controversy increased. Both as a defensive measure and as a signal of the
evolving nature of the Bauhaus curriculum and aims, a new motto, “Art and Technics: A
New Unity,” and a new seal, Oskar Schlemmer’s “Constructed Man,” were adopted in
1922. Tempering Gropius’s earlier proclamation of social revolution through art, the
attempt to unify “art and technology” sought to counter what many Bauhdusler, students
and faculty alike, perceived as the subjective and mystical excess of certain aspects of the
program. Officials of Thuringia regarded the program as a waste of resources and a
hotbed of foreign influence, a reading of Gropius’s original intentions that was not
dissuaded by the school’s new motto and seal. Students, dismayed by the constant
upheavals within the school and searching for an alternative to Expressionist drama, were
drawn to forms of Constructivism. Sensing an opportunity to achieve an even greater
impact for his own artistic ideas during the Dada-Constructivist Congress held in Weimar
in 1922, Theo van Doesburg, founder of the Dutch Constructivist movement De Stijl, set
up an atelier in Weimar. Students began to migrate to van Doesburg’s studio, perhaps in
search of an objective, delimited, and scientific (mathematical) approach to art, and this
inevitably led to the import of van Doesburg’s ideas and influence within the Bauhaus
itself. A master of compromise bent on sustaining his educational program, Gropius
approached the problem directly, hiring the Hungarian Dada-Constructivist Lazslo
Moholy-Nagy, a student and associate of van Doesburg, to teach the preliminary course.
This arrangement brought about a relative truce between van Doesburg and Gropius.

In further response to the criticism leveled by his peers and colleagues,
Gropius sought to assuage various factions, elaborating his views with the
publication of (Idea and Construction of the Weimar Bauhaus) in
1923. Although Gropius’s vision of the Bauhaus program had evolved into
a more comprehensive plan (including admissions policies, a program
constitution, and a more carefully articulated curriculum), retained
several ideas from his original vision, ideas now wedded to a focus on
demonstrating outcomes. The more abstract courses taught by Klee and
Kandinsky were supplemented by carpentry, stained-glass,

RAUIIAUS

Chair by Marcel Breuer (1925); poster
by Muriel Cooper © Library of
Congress, Prints and Photographs
Division

pottery, metal, weaving, stage, wall-painting, and architecture workshops. The 1923
Bauhaus exhibition—an event requested by the Thuringian Legislative Assembly—
provided a report of the Bauhaus’s accomplishments to date. The exhibition, spread
mainly throughout the school, featured a one-family house (“Haus am Horn”), built and
furnished entirely by the Bauhaus students, and included lectures, performances, and
“other entertainments,” such as the Bauhaus jazz band.

A whole greater than the sum of its parts, the Weimar Bauhaus program sought to
overturn the “decadence of architecture” and the “elitist and isolating effects of the
academy” with an “awareness of the infinite [that can only be] given form... through
finite means.” Uniquely combining Elementarist theory, nature study, representationa
techniques and methods, and quasi-scientific experimentation with materials and
processes, the Bauhaus curriculum sought to promote a seamless integration of “practica
building, building experiments, and the engineering sciences.” Seeking a revolution of art
with the intention of providing a revolutionary impulse for humanistically based change,

16 &,

Gropius’s “guiding principle” was centered on “the idea of creating a new unity through


the welding together of many arts and movements: a unity having its basis in Man
himself and significant only as a living organism.” The prolific output of Gropius and the
Bauhaus masters and students, coupled with the support of numerous critics, scientists,
architects, and artists, could not forestall the antagonisms and threats of the state
government (Thuringia). The decision to leave Weimar was made on 26 December 1924.
Students and masters of the Bauhaus finally vacated the premises of the Bauhaus at
Weimar in the first few months of 1925. By this time, 526 students had been trained at
the Bauhaus, although far more took only the preliminary course.

Fortunately, the close of the Bauhaus at Weimar did not represent the end of the
Bauhaus program. During the period of greatest controversy in Weimar, Gropius secured
permission from the mayor of the city of Dessau, Dr. Fritz Hesse, to transfer the Bauhaus
to Dessau, where it remained relatively free of state criticism for several years. Almost all
the former Bauhaus masters transferred to Dessau, and five former students—including
Josef Albers, Herbert Bayer, and Marcel Breuer—were appointed masters. Gropius
designed a new suite of buildings to house the program, moving the program from its
temporary quarters in Dessau in 1926. Sharing its premises with the Municipal Arts and
Crafts School, the Dessau Bauhaus included the technically innovative school building
(including a laboratory workshop, administration offices, and technical school) and a
dormitory with 28 studio apartments, baths, dining hall (which acted as an auditorium
and included a stage), and laundry for the students. Near the Bauhaus, Gropius designed a
series of houses for the Bauhaus masters and director, all of which were supplemented by
the Bauhaus workshops. The curriculum was modified as well, enlarging the architecture
program and adding a department of typography and layout. The principles were also
clarified, with the purpose of the Bauhaus defined as “1. The intellectual, manual and
technical training of men and women of creative talent for all kinds of creative work,
especially building; and 2. The execution of practical experimental work, especially
building and interior decoration, as well as the development of models for industrial and
manual production.” A Bauhaus Corporation, chartered for the express purpose of
handling the business aspects of the various Bauhaus models, was also installed.

The Dessau Bauhaus continued to thrive. In 1926 Gropius received an additional
commission to design 60 housing units for a new housing community in Dessau, a
commission that grew to 316 houses by 1928, all of which were partly furnished by the
Bauhaus workshops. In 1926 the new generation of Bauhaus masters—Albers, Breuer,
and Bayer among them—began to elaborate the practical experiments of the Bauhaus,
producing furniture, typography, graphic design, photography, weaving, light fixtures,
and domestic objects that have come to be known as representative of the “Bauhaus
style.” Parallel studies in painting and sculpture also developed, with the figurative
lyricism of Klee and Schlemmer providing a foil for Kandinsky’s continued experiments
with analytic abstraction.

Because of the relative stability of the program, the over-whelming administrative
burdens placed on him in the position of director, and a substantial increase of
professional work, Gropius resigned in early 1928, recommending as his successor the
head of the Department of Architecture, the Swiss architect Hannes Meyer. Because of
various conflicts with municipal authorities, Meyer resigned in 1930. His replacement,
the German architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, moved the Bauhaus to Berlin in 1932,
continuing to oversee the program until it was closed by the reactionary National


Socialist regime in April 1933. The closure of the Bauhaus, presaged by the program’s
original commitment to humanistically based change, pedagogical experimentation,
innovation, and internationalism, did not in fact spell the demise of the Bauhaus.
Guaranteed by the numerous graduates of the program and facilitated by its prominence
as a premier program for the study of the arts and architecture, the Bauhaus program was
incorporated into various design curricula throughout Europe and the United States.
Bauhausler, including Mies van der Rohe, Moholy-Nagy, Gropius, and Albers, were
appointed to head schools of art and architecture, and many other members of the
Bauhaus received teaching positions in universities, colleges, and schools of art. Together
with their advocates, Bauhdusler revolutionized the way in which art and architecture
were taught while reinforming modern American business and commerce with new ideas
about modern life (domestic and corporate) and advanced methods of communication. As
Mies so deftly phrased the impact of the Bauhaus, it was not a style, an institution, or
even a program for study; rather, “it was an idea, and Gropius formulated this idea with
great precision.... The fact that it was an idea, I think, is the cause of this enormous
influence the Bauhaus had on every progressive school around the globe. You cannot do
that with organization, you cannot do that with propaganda. Only an idea spreads so far.”
ELIZABETH BURNS GAMARD
Breuer, Marcel (United States) Constructivism; De Stijl; Gropius, Walter
(Germany); Meyer, Hannes (Germany); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig

(Germany); van Doesburg, Theo (Netherlands)

Further Reading

Bayer, Herbert, Walter Gropius, and Ise Gropius (editors), _ New York: Museum of
Modern Art, 1938; London: Allen and Unwin, 1939
Droste, Magdalena, Cologne: Taschen Verlag, 1990; as translated by Karen
Williams, Berlin: Taschen, 1990
Forgacs, Eva, Pécs, Hungary: Jelenkor Irodalmi és Muvészeti Kiadé, 1991; as
translated by John Batki, Budapest and New York: Central European University Press,

1995
Gropius, Walter, | New York: Harper and Row, 1955; London: Allen and Unwin, 1956
Hochman, Elaine S., New York: Fromm International, 1997

Kaes, Anton, Martin Jay, and Edward Dimendberg, Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1994
Kentgens-Craig, Margaret, Frankfurt and New York: Lang, 1993; as
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1999
Lane, Barbara Miller, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1968
Whitford, Frank, New York: Thames and Hudson, 1984

Wingler, Hans Maria, Bramsche: Gebr. Rasch, 1962; 2nd edition, as

Cologne: DuMont Schauberg, 1968; 2nd edition translated as translated by
Wolfgang Jabs and Basil Gilbert, edited by Joseph Stein, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press, and London: Cambridge University Press, 1969; 3rd edition, Cambridge,

Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1976

BAUHAUS, DESSAU

Designed by Walter Gropius; completed 1926 Dessau, Germany

Walter Gropius (1883-1969), the founder and first director of the Bauhaus, was the
architect of the Bauhaus building in Dessau, Germany, completed in 1926. This new
28,000-plus square-foot educational building, which became the symbol for the renowned
avant-garde academy of design in Germany, was the second home for this architecture
and design school. Gropius, whose visionary zeal created the Bauhaus School in Weimar
in 1919, moved the school from Weimar to Dessau in 1925 at the invitation of Dessau’s
progressive mayor, Fritz Hesse. The design of the Bauhaus was begun in 1925, after he
moved to Dessau, and formally opened 4-5 December 1926.

The building design exemplified Gropius’s educational philosophy, “Art and
Technology: A New Unity,” which expressed the critical and inventive role of architects
and designers within the seemingly chaotic and rapidly changing technological society of
the times. This slogan, revised from “Art and Craft: A New Unity,” his first 1919 Weimar
Bauhaus slogan, referred to a building both designed through and fitted with up-to-date
machinery that promoted the development of prototypical contemporary designs for
industrial production. His design invoked debates between architects who worked within
the tradition of fine arts, craft, and handicraft and those who embraced the potential for
technological advances promised by modern industry. Gropius, with his partner Adolf
Meyer, first explored these questions in their design of the Fagus Werk (1912, 1914) in
Alfeld, Germany. Gropius’s Bauhaus building extends his philosophy and synthesizes
these seemingly opposing beliefs whose outcome was shared: to raise the standards of
design and public taste through modern technology.

The Dessau Bauhaus building was conceived during an atmosphere of political and
social turmoil in Germany. Formerly a state-supported school in Weimar, once the right-
wing conservative majority in Weimar came to power, the school was denounced in 1923
as filled with avant-garde foreign Bolsheviks, and in 1925 demands leading to its closure
were imminent. Gropius, who quickly searched for another home, found Dessau. Dessau,
led by progressive Social Democrats, made the school a city-funded institution and
provided construction funds and prime sites for the new building complex and its faculty
residences (1926). Dessau’s progressive roots could be traced back to Prince Leopold
Friedrich Franz von Anhalt-Dessau (1740-1817), who believed that design should
combine “beauty with use.” Between 1765 and 1820, Prince Anhalt-Dessau, who created
Europe’s first English-style landscapes, redesigned Dessau and neighboring areas,
including Wérlitz Park (1790 and later). Wérlitz, designed by the prince and his friend
Baron Erdmannsdorff, was model for Dessau’s principles of enlightened government and
religious tolerance. The Bauhaus building, a landmark building for Dessau, was set in a
natural parklike setting outside the city center. This permitted the design to become a
counterpoint to Dessau’s urban industrial fabric. Similar to Gropius’s motto “Art and
Technology: A New Unity,” the building could be seen in light of the area’s traditional
promotion of visionary architects.

The mayor recognized that Dessau’s design problems could become design projects
for Gropius and his Bauhaus. These were typical design problems that industrial urban
centers faced: the necessity for careful urban planning that directed rapid growth and


carefully conceived housing that provided the resulting expanding population with
housing, schools, and other institutional and civic buildings. Gropius moved his
architectural practice to Dessau, leaving his partner Adolf Meyer, and began working
with architects Emst Neufert and Carl Fieger on the design and construction of the
Bauhaus as well as other new projects, including the masters’ houses (1926), the
workers’ housing estate (1928) at Térten, and the Dessau Employment Office (1929).
Architects Carl Fieger and Ernst Neufert developed the design of the Bauhaus in
Dessau with Gropius. Ernst Neufert was head architect in Gropius’s office, and Carl
Fieger developed the initial sketches in 1925 to establish the idea of the building. Fieger
had a profound effect on the design. His sketches show three parts of the building, each a
distinct element of the building’s program yet joined as one building by various bridging,
roofing, and massing elements. Initially, the program consisted of the arts and crafts
school, workshops, and administrative offices. The administration area was located
between the two other areas, serving as an actual and conceptual bridge between the
school and workshops and spanning a road that bisected the site. Additional areas,
student housing, dining/auditorium facilities, and generous and carefully designed public
spaces within the building created contiguous social gathering spaces within the
institution. Spacious stairs with generous landings, well-proportioned lobbies, foyers, and
hallways (“circulation areas”) provided places for formal and informal gatherings.
Gropius’s building was very different from those buildings designed from Renaissance
or baroque principles. Unlike these historical precedents, the Bauhaus was neither
symmetrical nor axial. As Gropius explained, one had to “walk right around the whole
building” in order to understand the design. Otherwise, its design could be understood
only from the air. His favorite photographs, which were published throughout the world,
were aerial views of the building. Seen from above, Gropius’s building was a series of
simple cubic masses joined by planar roofs. What could not be experienced from aerial
photography were the phenomenal effects of light and space captured by and within the
building.
As the inventor of the “dematerialized” corner, Gropius expressed this
innovation of the glass curtain wall here as well as in his Fagus factory.
The metal and glass “curtain” was hung from the exterior edge ofa
cantilevered, unsupported (and seemingly floating) floor slab, revealing
empty and open corners. This structural innovation, which permitted the
corner column to disappear, allowed the workshop wing to appear as if it
were wrapped in glass. A clear reference to the Utopian and
Expressionistic writings of German poet Paul Scheerbart, Gropius
brilliantly detailed the transparent wall as curtain, taking full advantage of
the technological possibilities provided by the primary structural system: a
reinforced-concrete frame with cantilevered slabs (deeper than necessary
due to contemporary building codes). The reinforced-concrete skeleton,
with mushroom-


Bauhaus building (1926), designed by
Walter Gropius, Dessau, Germany

© Austrian Archives/CORBIS.

Reproduced with permission from
Bauhaus Archiv, Berlin

headed columns, was in-filled with brickwork and hollow tile floors. The glass and steel
curtain wall included operable steel windows (currently aluminum) whose exposed and
articulated control devices created yet another sublime homage to machined technology,
which remains intimately engaged to the hand and body. In many ways, this building
reinforced the corporeal nature of the body as well as the building, as evidenced by the
design of asphalt-tiled terrace-roofs and balconies, all part of the educational and social
life of the school.

The style of this building is modern, without a doubt. However, beyond that obvious
fact, others have variously described its form and style. Historians Henry-Russell
Hitchcock and Philip Johnson used this building to derive their interpretations of
International Style. They also claimed it to be the model for a “Bauhaus” style. Theo van
Doesburg, the Dutch artist and architect, claimed it as a prime example of his De Stijl
(literally, “the style”), whereas others claimed it as a part of the ambiguous (New
Objectivity), implying a consistent and carefully worked out rationalism. Others see it as
a modern representation of the complete or “total work of art,” or as a collaboration of
all members of the Bauhaus: the director, teachers (“masters”), and students who made
furniture, fittings, hardware, and finishings in the workshops. One might argue that it has
no style but rather that it addressed its own Zeitgeist (spirit of the time)—as
contemporary topics and ideas.

The Dessau Bauhaus recently named one of only three modern buildings
on the UNESCO world heritage list, has recently undergone a renovation
that will by 2006 have fully restored the building to its pristine and
original state. This honors note-worthy features that made it a model of
both modern and contemporary design. Clear distinction between the
building’s parts and its overall layout, the large expanse of glass covering
the entire street, and careful detailing remain delightful and fascinating.
Gropius, who believed that architecture shapes “the patterns of life,” took
these “patterns” beyond simple function to create forms that shape the
beauty and wonder of the activities of life. This was confirmed by Nelly
Schwalacher’s description of her visit, which she wrote for a German
newspaper in the fall of 1927:

I arrive in Dessau at dawn. Fog hands over the city. Our headlights
occasionally penetrate the damp air. But the eye is drawn to a dazzling
beam of light. A giant light cube: the new Bauhaus building. Later, with
sunshine and blue sky, the building remains a focal point of lightness and
brightness. Glass, glass and more glass, radiating daz-zling white light
from every wall. I have never seen such a light reflector. And the weight
of the walls is neutralized by two factors, namely the high glass walls
openly revealing the light steel structure of the building and the radiating
whiteness. (“Das Neue Bauhaus,” evening edition [31 October 1927];
from Droste, 1990)

However, realities derived from the design created their own problems within the
building: undersized and inefficient heating, huge heat gain and heat loss from expansive,
unprotected, and noninsulated glass facades; poorly maintained roofs, which led to
leakage; and a lack of privacy, which, according to today’s American traditions, would be
unacceptable. For example, art historian Rudolf Arnheim inadvertently revealed a lack of
privacy: “Looking in through the large windows, you can see people hard at work or
relaxing in private” (Droste, 1990).

Gropius resigned as Bauhaus director soon after the building’s completion and was
followed by architects Hannes Meyer and then Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who
strengthened and focused the coursework in architecture. However, in 1932 the Bauhaus
lost its municipal support and its beloved building after Dessau’s Social Democrats were
defeated by the National Socialist Party. Mies van der Rohe restructured the school and
moved it to Berlin. The Nazis dissolved it in 1933.

The building was transformed after the Bauhaus program moved out. First, on 1
October 1932, it was dissolved as a municipal institution, and then the National Socialist
majority, who described the building as a “squalid glass palace in oriental taste,” pushed
for its demolition. Although the building might have been saved, once the Nazis came to
power, the building was raided. All documentation, drawings, furnishings, and even
fittings were destroyed or stolen. During World War II, the glass curtain wall of the
workshop wing was almost entirely destroyed. In 1948 it was replaced by brick walls


with small square windows. The building held various institutions: a girls’ finishing
school, a Nazi traming school, part of the Junkers military aircraft manufacturing
company, a POW camp, and, after the war, a homeless shelter and the home of schools
displaced by the war. In 1964 the windows were replaced by horizontal bands of glass
with wide spandrels until 1974, when the East Germans included the building on their list
of significant monuments and began restoration. In 1984 it became the home of the
“Center of Form at the Dessau Bauhaus” and, most recently, the “Bauhaus Foundation.”
This organization, currently renamed the “Bauhaus Kolleg” and directed by an urban
planner, addresses the “problems” and “spirit” of the present.

Few of Gropius’s contemporaries and later critics agreed with the Nazis’ assessment.
Before World War II, the Bauhaus buildings were the epitome of modern architecture in
Germany. Hundreds of visitors from Germany and abroad traveled to Dessau. Its renown
extended from constant publicity through photographs, especially aerial photography,
exhibits, publications, and the writings of prominent critics. In 1927 Rudolf Arnheim
wrote about the clarity of structure and skillful yet honest construction. Eleven years
later, Alfred H.Barr Jr., then director of the Museum of Modern Art in New York,
described it as the most important structure of its decade, and in 1954 Sigfried Giedion
called it the first building to employ a radically new conception of space. From the time it
was completed to the present, architects and students in architecture considered the
Bauhaus building in Dessau as one of the most, if not the most, influential buildings of
the modern period of architecture. It remains a mecca for students, practitioners, and
connoisseurs of architecture.

MARCIA F.FEUERSTEIN

Bauhaus; De Stijl; Fagus Werk, Alfeld, Germany; International Style;
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); van Doesburg, Theo
(Netherlands)

Further Reading

Most of the readings in English refer to the building in the context of the school. Few
focus solely on the architectural design. Gropius’s book is an excellent source for
images and the architect’s original ideas. However, it remains in German. There are many
general texts about the school, its activities, masters, and background, as well as
translations of documents, letters, and works from the various stages of the Bauhaus.
Droste, Magdalena, Cologne: Taschen, 1990; as translated by Karen Williams,
Berlin: Taschen, 1993
Futagawa, Yukio (editor), Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1994
Gropius, Walter, | Munich: Langen, 1930
Kentgens-Craig, Margret (editor), Basel and Boston: Birkhauser, 1998; as
translated by Michael Robinson, Basel and Boston: Birkhauser, 1998
Krause, R., “A History of the Development of the Plans for the Bauhaus Building in

Dessau,” 28, no. 2 (1998)
Wingler, Hans Maria, Bramsche, Germany: Gebr. Rasch, 1962; 2nd revised edition,
as Cologne: DuMont Schauberg, 1968; 2nd edition, as translated by

Wolfgang Jabs and Basil Gilbert, edited by Joseph Stein, Cambridge, Massachusetts:

MIT Press, and London: Cambridge University Press, 1969; 3rd revised edition,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1976

BAWA, GEOFFREY 1919-

Architect, Sri Lanka

Geoffrey Bawa is a rare architect whose work combines an environmentally
appropriate beauty with a cultural sensitivity. Bawa was educated within the modernist
tradition in the West, where he was trained both as a lawyer and as an architect. An
urbane, widely read, and well-traveled person, he remains rooted in the soil of his native
land. His buildings are predicated on the landscape and climate—he is as much an
architect of landscape as he is of buildings.

To Bawa, the pitched roof is the archetype of southern Asian architecture. It is the

dominant element that governs his aesthetic, in which shape, texture, and proportion are
the strongest visual factors in his buildings. The great roof, with the building’s sides open
to the flow of air and the view, give “presence to both function and form, to admit beauty
and pleasure as well as purpose” (as told to the author, 1984). Another important feature
of his work deals with movement through the building, modulated by the rooms,
passages, and courtyards that frame vistas or parts of the landscape. Of equal importance
is the play of light, in both the built areas and the “rooms” of the landscaping, which
gives pleasure in addition to giving comfortable, functional use of the spaces. Bawa pays
careful attention to detail, ranging from the expression of structure to the furnishing of
rooms, regardless of the scale of the project.
Bawa has been fortunate to be in the position to choose his projects and select clients
who are sympathetic to his approach. They include artists and intellectuals, private
institutions, and government. The perception and organizational skills of his longtime
partner, Dr. Poologasundram, an engineer, has enabled the Bawa to realize the buildings
as conceived. He has worked with several others in his office for many years, and they
also assist him in the development of his ideas. However, Bawa remains the principal and
controls every aspect of the design.

Bawa designs using numerous freehand sketches, while simultaneously working on
the site layout plan, section, elevation, and details. His partners and colleagues begin to
formalize the work with schematic and working drawings. Often construction drawings
and details are discussed with the craftsman and are changed. In the mode of the master
architect, Bawa will alter his design on-site while the building is under construction. This
technique was even used on his large Parliament Complex Colombo which was built by a
Japanese company on a turnkey basis, but Bawa’s on-site decisions and solutions proved
better and more cost-effective than the original plan.

His personal residences best illustrate his approach to design. His country house,
Lunuganga, has been a continuing project since 1950. Set in a garden of 25 acres, the
house and its free-standing pavilions overlook terraces and a lake, and illustrate his
concerns with site and the expression of a contemporary vernacular. He has periodically
added new buildings and elements, such as a large concrete chess set and a grove of trees


and benches. Each of the pavilions has its own character and fits into its natural setting. It
is perhaps his masterpiece, and was once described by one of the workmen as “a sacred
place.” His principal residence in Colombo dates from 1969, and consists of four
townhouses joined together with multiple small courtyards and a maze of rooms. It
illustrates well his characteristic skill in working with small spaces to create intimacy and
a sense of place.

The theme of pavilions set in a landscape typifies his architecture, as in the Ena de
Silva House (Colombo, 1962) and the 12 pavilion houses (1973) built in Batujimbar,
Indonesia, and designed with artist, Donald Friend. Low-cost schools such as Yahapath
Endra Farm School (1966) in Hanwella extend this approach into the realm of
institutional buildings. Bawa works this on an even larger scale at the University of
Ruhunu (1984-86) in Matara, on the southern coast. There he not only planned the
university, but also designed the Arts and Sciences faculty building as well as others.
Pavilions of varying size, some of which are placed on stilts, are arranged to take
advantage of the verdant site and the view to the sea.

Bawa is also known for his tourist beach hotels. Bentota Beach Hotel
(Bentota, 1969) has a dramatic entry staircase that spotlights the Sinhalese
batik cloths on the ceiling. The Triton Hotel (1981) in Ahungalla has open
spaces and public facilities

The Garden at Lunuganga, exterior
view showing wood columns
supporting overhang, Sri Lanka
(1950), by Geoffrey Bawa

Photo by Helene Binet © Aga Khan
Award for Architecture

on the ground floor with bedrooms above, and all have vistas of the beach and sea. A
huge, ornamental entry pool leads to an open-sided reception area, which in turn
overlooks a swimming pool that appears to merge into the sea and sky. This progression
of spaces and visual effects is a common theme that appears in his work. Bawa’s
Kandalama Hotel (1995) in Dambulla is sited on a hillside and approached from a lake. It
takes full advantage of the views, and the concrete-frame structure is expressed in a
modernist facade.

This aesthetic and the use of concrete, steel, and glass mark some of his office
buildings and institutional complexes. His largest single structure, the Parliamentary
Complex in Kotte (1982), is set in an artificially constructed lake. Pavilions of varying
size flank the ceremonial building, with its large central volume containing the
government assembly chamber and ancillary spaces. The huge copper roofs are
reminiscent of monastic and royal buildings of the past yet convey a contemporary
image. Bawa’s buildings, both public and private, cover a range of types, and although
his work is often classified as “vernacular,” it is executed in varying styles.

Bawa’s work is contemporary yet seems to have existed in the landscape over the
ages; it is a truly timeless architecture. Artist Barbara Sansoni wrote that his work
“represents the distil-lation of centuries of shared experience, and links at the first level
of achievement, its ancient architecture to that of the modern world” (Taylor 1986).

HASAN-UDDIN KHAN

Biography

Born in Colombo, Sri Lanka, 23 July 1919. Studied English literature, University of
Cambridge, England; bachelor of arts 1941; studied law, Middle Temple, London;
barrister-at-law 1943; attended, Architectural Association, London; degree in architecture
1956. Private practice, Colombo, from 1956; partner, Edwards Reid and Begg, Colombo
1958; collaboration with Ulrik Plesner 1958-67; adviser to the government of Fiji on the
restoration of the old capital 1986. Teaching fellowship, Aga Khan Pragramme for
Architecture, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 1986. President, Sri
Lanka Institute of Architects, Colombo 1969-70; honorary fellow, American Institute of
Architects 1983; member, Master Jury, 4th Aga Khan Awards for Architecture 1989.
Vidya Jothi (Light of Science) 1985. Since the mid-1990s Bawa has been totally
incapacitated and unable to work: his projects are being completed by his staff.

Selected Works

Almost all of Bawa’s buildings are in Sri Lanka with the exception of severalin Bali,
southern India, and Indian Ocean islands.

Lunuganga, the Garden House, Bentota, 1950

Carmen Gunasekera House, Colombo, 1959

Ena de Silva House, Colombo, 1962

The Architect’s Office, Colombo, 1963

St. Bridget’s Montessori School, Colombo, 1964

BEHRENS, PETER 1868-1940

Architect, German

Peter Behrens was one of the most prolific architects of his generation. He created
buildings ranging from embassies, monuments, bridges, churches, and giant factories to
domestic houses, workers’ estates, and apartment blocks. He also became the first
industrial designer in the modern sense; he was responsible for mass-produced furniture,
textiles, cutlery, ceramics, and glass in addition to his well-known range of electrical
appliances for the AEG, or General Electric Company. His graphic work was enormously
successful, and he was active in theater design, calligraphy, and typography. He was a
teacher and a writer, and he had a strong influence on the development of his assistants,
who were to become the most celebrated architects of the next generation. Behrens was
born in St. Georg, Hamburg, and he was the son of a landowner who did not marry his
mother. Both his parents died when he was young, and he was reared by a guardian from
the age of 14. On leaving school in Altona in 1886, he chose to study art and attended the
Gewerbeschule, Hamburg, and the Kunstschule, Karlsruhe, until 1889, before becoming
first a pupil of Ferdinand Briitt in Dusseldorf and then of Hugo Kotschenreiter in Munich.
Behrens went through various phases in his painting style; at first he was influenced by
the realist and impressionist work of Dutch-German and Dutch artists, such as Wilhelm
Leib] and Max Liebermann, before turning to studio compositions of a more symbolist
approach. Behrens never sought or acquired formal qualifications as an architect. In the
later 1890s, while still living in Munich, he executed a number of woodcuts in a flat,
linear style and became drawn into the group that formed the Vereinigten Werkstatten fiir
Kunst im Handwerk, designing and exhibiting ceramics, glass, jewelry, furniture, and
women’s clothing. His large woodcut, (1898), became one of the best-known images of
Jugendstil, or German Art Nouveau.

In July 1899, as a result of his reputation as an artist and designer, he was invited to
join the artists’ colony at Darmstadt, which was being established under the patronage of
Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig of Hessen. This colony was planned and launched with ducal,
government, and industrial support to stimulate the role of applied art in the local
economy and to bring prestige to the city. The seven artists brought together at Darmstadt
were to be a free creative community, and to exhibit their work regularly; they were to
live in houses designed by the Austrian architect Joseph Maria Olbrich, with the
exception of Behrens, who designed his own.

This house, his first, was to accommodate himself, his wife, and their two young
children. It was intended, like the other houses of the _(artists’ colony), to be at once a
dwelling and a permanent exhibit of the new architecture, a statement of a way of living
and a model of style.

Behrens’s house is basically cubic in form, with a red-tiled pyramidal roof. A gable
dominates the main facade, and the plain white walls are relieved with decorative pilaster
strips, quoins, and architraves in molded green-glazed bricks. Internally, the ground floor
is comprised of an entrance hall with wide sliding screens that open into a music room

that in turn connect to a dining room, so that virtually the whole space can be unified
when desired. The studio is a principal room upstairs. Behrens designed all the interior
decorations—the furniture, carpets, curtains, light fittings, cutlery, glass, china, and
linen—in harmony. He and his house played a major role in the 1901 exhibition of the
artists’ colony, titled (A Document of German Art). In his first year in the colony, he
wrote and published a long essay on the theater, and designed a round, highly
centralized Festival Theatre, the plans of which were published but never realized.

In 1902 Behrens’s first printing type, Behrens-Schrift, was published. He was to
design a number of typefaces, including a special face for the AEG that is still used today
for that company’s logo, and, with Anna Simons, the inscription on the portico of the
Reichstag in Berlin, (1909).

Of importance to his growing reputation was his contribution to the First International
Exhibition of Modern Decorative Arts in Turin in 1902. He was responsible for the
Hamburger Vorhalle, a powerfully modeled, cryptlike, top-lit hall. It may be considered
the most Art Nouveau of Behrens’s architectural works, and the strongest expression of
his admiration for Frederich Nietzsche’s philosophy. Following this, his architecture
became more rectilmear and geometric, and indeed it remained so for the rest of his
career.

In 1903 Behrens moved to Diisseldorf, where he had been appointed director of the
School of Arts and Crafts. In that year, he traveled in England and Scotland, visiting
houses by Edwin Lutyens and Charles Rennie Mackintosh. A striking demonstration of
Behrens’s new, coolly geometrical style was seen in the garden layout and pavilion that
he designed for the Diisseldorf Gartenbau und Kunstausstellung (Garden Design and
Pavilion) of 1904. In harmony with the restaurant pavilion (which Behrens furnished with
Mackintosh-like ladder-backed chairs) were rectangular white latticework pergolas,
creating what was described as “habitable nature, a living room in the open air” (Osborn).
A lasting influence on Behrens’s design procedure came from the proportional grids,
based on the square and the circle evolved by the Dutch architect J.L.M.Lauweriks, who
joined Behrens’s staff in that year. Behrens spent the summer of that same year studying
the antiquities of Rome and Pompeii.

Between 1904-06, Behrens designed a number of buildings that directly
fuse the elements of simple geometry with classically derived decoration.
For example, the complex of buildings for the Northwest German Art
Exhibition of 1905 was symmetrically grouped on a broad rectangular

space to form an ensemble


Behrens House (architect’s house
Kiinstler-Kolonie), Darmstadt,
Germany, designed by Peter Behrens
(1901)

© Earl Moursund/GreatBuildings.com

of cubes, pyramids, domes, and triangles. The stark white buildings with their bold
geometric surface patterns suppressed any expression of their material or constructional
elements. His domed, octagonal exhibition pavilion in Dresden for the Delmenhorster
Linoleumfabrik of 1906, as well as the range of linoleum patterns exhibited in it, led to
Behrens’s recognition as an artist who was gifted for and suited to working with modern
industry.

Behrens’s friendship with the patron Karl Ernst Osthaus of Hagen led to a number of
commissions in the city, as well as to his famous Crematorium nearby at Delstern (1906—
07). They included a lecture theater for the Folkwang Museum (1905), a shop for the firm
of Josef Klein (1905-07), a large octagonal Protestant church that was never built (1906—
07), and an important group of houses on an estate at Eppenhausen, for which Osthaus
was the developer.

The garden suburb at Eppenhausen was divided by Osthaus into three zones, and he
asked Behrens, Lauweriks, and the Belgian Henri van de Velde to prepare related groups
of houses for each area. Behrens’s were built between 1909 and 1912, following a
dramatic new phase in his life as artistic adviser to the AEG. He moved to Berlin in 1907,
and his three houses (the Cuno, Schroeder, and Goedecke houses) were detailed and su-
pervised by Walter Gropius. Gropius was the closest to him of the team of assistants he
had engaged to join his Berlin studio, to work on his now immensely expanded practice.
The most impressive of the houses remains the Cuno house (1909-10). Rectangular in
plan, it resembles a Palladian villa, with a nearly symmetrical disposition of the rooms on
the ground floor. The living room on the garden side, centrally placed between the
identically scaled dining room and the ladies’ drawing room, opens through a large three-
light French window onto a generous terrace. The most striking feature of the main, street
facade is the curved central tower, recessed into the plane of the front walls, which rises
the full height of the elevation and contains a spiral staircase. This, with its five plain
narrow windows between slender piers, is flanked by a rusticated ground-floor story in
local stone, above which plain, smoothly rendered wall surfaces are broken only by three
square bedroom windows on either side in the upper story. The web of horizontal and
vertical tensions of the design is given an asymmetrical rhythm by the stone wall of one
of the balconies (which flank the house on either side), wrapping around to the front as a
thick buttresslike wall. Horizontal emphasis is given by the low-pitched roof set behind a
stepped-back parapet, a thin emphatic cornice, and a similar stringcourse halfway up the
facade.

The most remarkable development in Behrens’s career was his appointment in 1907 to
the AEG. He redesigned the firm’s range of arc lamps, kettles, coffee pots, fans, clocks,
radiators, and motors, bringing enormous commercial success to the firm. He designed a
vast range of brochures, posters, and catalogs and devised typefaces as well as the logo of
the company. More important, he became responsible for the firm’s industrial
architecture. In 1910 the best known of his factory buildings, the Turbine Hall at Moabit,
was completed. The largest steel hall in Berlin of its time, this great building is formed of
22 girder frames exposed along one side; the main facade has a huge steel-framed
window under a curved segmental concrete gable; the profile is made up of six straight
facets. This rests on massive-looking concrete piers, grooved horizontally, which affect
the corners on either side. Its peculiar genius lies in the expressive force of steel and glass
used on a large scale, without historical decorations of any kind.

Between 1908 and 1914, a range of giant factory buildings on the Humbolthain in
Berlin were designed by Behrens and his team, which included Ludwig Mies van der
Rohe and, for a brief period, Charles-Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier) alongside
Gropius. The most significant of these steel-framed buildings were the High Tension
Materials Factory (1910), a powerful, expressive multistory complex with echoes of
classical form in its triangular pediments and pilasterlike columns on its principal facade,
and the Small Motors Factory (1910), with its vast, stoa-like range of 20-meter-high brick
piers facing Voltastrasse. Also, there is the Assembly Hall (for large machines, 1912)
flanking Hussitenstrasse, with its restrained grid of repeated horizontal and vertical
elements framing the large rectangular windows.

A major state commission of the period was the German Embassy, St. Petersburg
(1911-12), which owed inspiration to Roman of the 16th century and to Schinkel’s


Altes Museum. An astonishing number of other large projects that were completed
included the head office of the Mannesmann Tube Company in Disseldorf (1911-12), a
pioneering exercise in modular planning and construction; the Continental Rubber
Company Factory in Hannover (1911-12); the Frankfurt Gasworks Complex (191 1-12);
and the Festival Hall for the 1914 Werkbund Exhibition in Cologne.

Behrens’s contract with the AEG was terminated in 1914. After the war, he published,
with Heinrich de Fries, (1918; On Economical Building), which advocated low-cost
housing schemes to be built of reinforced concrete, incorporating the latest facilities and
communal social services using standardized units to create varied types of
accommodation with built-in storage cupboards to maximize the space.

Following a period of brick expressionism—used, for example, for the head offices of
the Hoechst Dyeworks for IG Farben and the Dombauhtitte (Cathedral Masons’ Lodge)
exhibition building in Munich (1922)}—Behrens’s style changed yet again. This time the
change led to mainstream International Modern, a style for which his own earlier work
had been formative. Other projects included blocks of flats (1924-28) for the authorities
in Vienna, where he lived following his appointment as professor of the Master Schoo!
for Architecture, the small house New Ways in Northampton, England (1923-25), his
terrace block on the Weissenhof estate in Stuttgart (1926-27), his house for Dr. Lewin,
Berlin (1929-30), and the superb villa for Clara Gans in the Taunus Mountains (1931).
All of these buildings had flat roofs over plain, cubic forms with a strong horizonta
emphasis. His pavilion for the 1931 Berlin Building Exhibition was a delightful,
prototypical women’s clubhouse comprising several low intersecting cylindrica
elements.

During the Third Reich, despite being attacked as a Bolshevist, the elderly and sick
Behrens was invited to design a new AEG headquarters (1937-39) for the North-South
Axis of Berlin being planned by Albert Speer. It was never constructed.

ALAN WINDSOR
AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin; Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Corbusier, Le
(Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Mies
van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Olbrich, Josef Maria (Austria); van de

Velde, Henri (Belgium); Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne (1914)

Biography

Born in Hamburg, Germany, 14 April 1868. Attended the Karlsruhe and Diisseldorf Art
Schools 1886-89; studied privately in artists’ studios 1887-89. Married Lili Kramer
1889. Founding member, Munich Sezession 1893; co-formed Die Seben art colony,
Darmstadt, Germany 1899; designer to electrical combine AEG, Berlin 1907. Established
own firm, Berlin 1907. Director, Nuremberg Master Course in Architecture, 1902; head
of Diisseldorf School of Applied Arts 1903-07; director, Academy of Art, Diisseldorf,
Germany 1921-22; director and professor, School of Architecture, Vienna Academy of
Fine Arts, Vienna 1922-27; director, Department of Architecture, Prussian Academy of
Arts, Berlin 1936-40. His pupils included Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe. Died in Berlin, 27 February 1940.

Selected Works

Behrens House, Kiinstler-Kolonie, Darmstadt, 1901
Hamburger Vorhalle, Exhibition of Modern Decorative Arts, Turin, 1902
Garden Design and Pavilion, Diisseldorf, 1904
Exhibition Buildings, Northwest German Art Exhibition, 1905
Lecture Hall, Folkwang Museum, Hagen, 1905
Exhibition Pavilion, Delmenhorster Linoleumfabrik, Dresden, 1906
Crematorium, Delstern, 1907
Shop for Josef Klein, Hagen, 1907
Protestant Church (unbuilt), Hagen, 1907
Schréder House, Hagen-Eppenhausen, 1909
Cuno House, Hagen-Eppenhausen, 1910
AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin (with Karl Bernhard), 1910
AEG High Tension Materials Factory, Berlin, 1910
AEG Small Motors Factory, Berlin, 1910
Goedecke House, Hagen-Eppenhausen, 1912
AEG Large Machinery Assembly Hall, Berlin, 1912
AEG Railway Equipment Factory, Berlin, 1912
German Embassy, St. Petersburg, 1912
Mannesmann Tube Company Headquarters, Diisseldorf, 1912
Continental Rubber Company Office Building, Hanover, 1912
Gas Works Complex, Frankfurt, 1912
Festhalle, Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne, 1914
Nationale Automobil Aktien-Gesellschaft Housing and Factory, Berlin, 1917
Dombauhiitte, Kunstgewerbeschule, Munich, 1922
IG Farben Dyeworks Headquarters, Hoechst, 1924
New Ways House, Northampton, 1925
Terrace House Apartments, Stuttgart, 1927
Low-income Housing Blocks, Vienna, 1929
Kurt Lewin House, Berlin, 1930
Ring der Frauen Pavilion, Berlin Building Exhibition, 1931
Clara Ganz Villa, Kronberg im Taunus, 1931

AEG Administration Building (unbuilt), Berlin, 1939

Selected Publications

1900
1901
“Haus Peter Behrens,” Darmstadt, 1901, brochure
1902
1917
(with Heinrich de Fries), 1918
1920
1927

Further Reading

A detailed and scholarly catalogue of Behrens’s architecture, appliances for the AEG, and
graphics appears in Buddensieg and Rogge. Furniture is catalogued in Schuster, and work
for the Anker-Marke linoleum factory is listed in Asche.
Anderson, Stanford, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2000
Asche, Kurt, Berlin: Mann, 1992
Branchesi, Lida, “Peter Behrens” (Ph.D. dissertation), Rome, 1965
Buddensieg, Tilmann, and Henning Rogge, Berlin: Mann, 1979; 4th edition, 1993;
as translated by lain Boyd Whyte, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1984
Buderath, Bernhard, and Tilmann Buddensieg, Frankfurt: Prestel, 1990
240 (June 1960) (special issue on Behrens)
Cremers, Paul Joseph, Essen: Baedecker, 1928
part 4, Hoechst: Hoechst A.G., 1964
Gerber, Werner, Hagen: Linepe, 1980
Hesse-Frielinghaus, Herta, Hagen: Karl Ernst Osthaus Museum, 1966
Hoeber, Fritz, Munich: Miiller und Rentsch, 1913
Hoepfner, Wolfram, and Frizt Neumeyer, Mainz: Phillipp von Zabern, 1979
Kadatz, Hans-Joachim, Leipzig: Seemann, 1977
Krimmel, Bernd (editor), Darmstadt: Roether, 1976
Norberg-Schulz, Christian, | Rome: Officina Edizione, 1980; 2nd edition, 1986
Osborn, Max, vol. 12 (September) 1904
Pfeifer, Hans-Georg (editor), Diisseldorf: Beton-Verlag, 1990
Schuster, Peter-Klaus, (exhib. cat.), Munich: Prestel, 1980
Windsor, Alan, London: Architectural Press, and New York: Whitney Library of
Design, 1981

BEIRUT, LEBANON

The modern face of Beirut hides the city’s long architectural and urban history. Recent
archaeological excavations, generated by the post-civil war reconstruction, have provided
further evidence that different civilizations have continuously inhabited the city since at
least the Iron Age. Hardly any architectural landmarks remain from before the 19th
century, with the exception of some religious buildings. Beirut remained a secondary
settlement to other cities along the eastern Mediterranean coast, such as Tripoli and
Damascus until 1831, when Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt, in his failed insurrection against the
Ottomans, took it as a base, and attracted merchants and consuls. Since then, the city has
grown from a town of 10,000 to a metropolitan district of about 1.5 million today.

The early years of growth were supported by many Ottoman modernization projects,
conducted mostly through concessions to European companies. These included harbor
expansion, public utilities, military facilities, and transportation networks, and most
notably, the toll road to Damascus (1863). Buildings such as the Orozdi Bek Department
Store (1900), the Arts and Crafts School (1914), including some of its extramural


residential quarters and missionary educational facilities, display a Mediterranean
architectural character that attests to the open cultural exchange at the time.

During World War I, Beirut suffered a famine, losing much of its population of
100,000. A major urban-planning endeavor was mounted by the Ottomans, that would be
completed during the French mandate (1918-43) in the form of Place de l’Etoile. The
mandate created a new nation-state—Greater Lebanon—with Beirut as its capital. With
the exception of urban improvements in the city center, the mandate continued the
modernization-by-concession process started by the Ottomans. It was not until 1932, in
the face of social tensions caused in part by the Great Depression, that an attempt at
large-scale urban planning began. Two master plans were advanced: one by the Danger
Brothers in 1932 and one by Michel Ecochard in 1942. The first created commercial
centers for new residential areas, while the second introduced a major road network
linking the port and airport with the hinterland. Neither plan was implemented.

The building of the city’s new quarters and institutions was carried out by some of its
established architects, including Yousif Aftimos and Mardiros Altounian. Aftimos helped
develop the ornate facade architecture of the new avenues in the city center, such as the
Municipality Building (1933) and Maarad Street (1930s). Altounian elevated Oriental Art
Deco motifs, extending it to civic architecture for the Lebanese Parliament and the
National Museum buildings. The pre-World War II period also saw the rise of a new
generation of architects, such as Antoun Tabet, Farid Trad, Ilyas Murr, and Bahjat
Abdulnour. Tabet’s link with the studio of Auguste Perret heralded the expressive
application of concrete-and-steel technology by many engineer-architects of the period,
whereas the work of Murr and Trad extended the forms of late Ottoman architecture into
the French mandate (1918-43) and early independence (1943-58). This extension of
styles and building types attests to the continuity within the urban developmental culture
across the different political epochs. Interestingly, a new vernacular architecture was
developed during this period, featuring multistory residential buildings built to absorb the
growing population.

Beirut’s economic primacy in the region was boosted by the sudden loss of
competition from the city of Haifa and the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1948.
This was supported by Lebanon’s strong banking and services sectors, and by the
presence of foreign business interests; it was paralleled by the strong intellectual and
political life that gave Beirut the reputation of being a breeding ground for regional
political and cultural movements. Architecture, however, remained cast in the
professional, technical arena. Following a brief civil war in 1958, urban development was
guided by a new welfare state and a new ministry of planning. Two major master plans
were proposed for Beirut; one by Constantinos Doxiadis in 1957-59 and one by Michel
Ecochard in 1963-64. Both master plans acknowledged the growth of the city and the
need to develop physical planning at a regional, and even a national, scale. The country’s
new institutions and infrastructure were given a strong modern image, as exemplified by
the Central Bank as designed by Swiss architects Addor et Julliard, among others.
However, the buildings were distributed mostly in the suburbs including such important
projects such as the Ministry of Defense (1965) and the Lebanese University (late 1960s)
by Maurice Hindieh and André Wogenscky. Hence, they did nothing to improve the
urban layout. Other architects of the period, such as Pierre el-Khoury, Bahije Khoury-
Makdisi, Wassek Adib, Pierre Neema, George Rayes, and Assem Salam, helped to

generate a professional culture that guided Lebanon’s architecture more effectively than
the intellectual networks and academic institutions. For example, Khoury’s Ecole
Technique provided a model for institutional buildings, whereas Adib’s collaborations
with Polish architect Karl Schayer provided the city with a facade along the seafront. The
Corniche combined a rational, structural frame with expressive ground planes and roofs.
With such buildings as the Shell Building (1962) by Schayer and Adib and the more
mannered work of Joseph Philippe Karam, the city acquired a new building type: a
mixed-use apartment building, that would come to dominate urban as well as suburban
development.

What emerged in the early 1960s as a vigorous expression of flexibility turned into a
formal anonymity in the 1970s under the pressure of speculative construction. Architects,
such as Pierre Neema and Michel Ecochard, sought a more institutional expressiveness,
as demonstrated by Neema’s Electricité du Liban (1962). Samir Khairallah and Assem
Salam would consciously incorporate regional styles, with Salam actively debating with
other Arab architects, such as Rifaat Chadirji (Iraq) and Jaafar Toukan (Jordan), about
national and Arab identity expressed through architecture. Despite the rise of many
schools of architecture, practice maintained its primacy in generating architectural
attitudes. This was caused by the continuation of a technical approach to architecture and
by the effectiveness of competition and open exchange that dominated the development
culture.
Beirut would witness exponential growth in population, from 10,000 within the
municipal district in 1920, to about 1.5 million in the metropolitan area by 1975. With
about half of Lebanon’s population occupying 5 percent of the land, Beirut had become a
virtual city-state. This imbalance in growth and development attracted the rural
population to the city, causing over-crowding in its immediate suburbs, and dire
socioeconomic problems. During the same period, the city also absorbed Palestinian
refugees increasing social tensions in the city. It led, along with religious and regional
conflicts, to a succession of wars between 1975 and 1990, and included the invasion of
the city by Israel in 1982. From 1975 to 1990, Beirut would suffer extensive damage,
leaving much of the commercial center’s architecture destroyed.
Since the 1990 Taef Accord, which reconciled Lebanon’s warring
factions, Beirut has been the focus of Lebanon’s reconstruction efforts.
The emphasis has been on rebuilding road networks and infrastructure
services and enlarging the city’s port and airport. Much of the urban
planning was guided by the (1986), a study developed by the Mission
Franco-Libanaise d’Etude et d’Aménagement, which called for
decentralization of the commercial activity toward regional centers, and
for a peripheral highway around the city. This study also stipulated a
special project for the city center, which was the area most affected by the

war. The city center was eventually developed by a private real


Banque du Liban et d’Outre Mer,
Beirut, Lebanon, designed by Pierre el-
Khoury (1996)

Photo courtesy Pierre el-Khoury © The Aga

Khan Award for Architecture
estate holding company that was set up to execute a master plan, developed by the Arab
consultant Dar al-Handasah (Shair and Partner). This plan caused controversy regarding
liquidation of property into shares, destruction of old streets and buildings, and the highly
speculative new development. The vague, urban design that characterized the plan was
further developed by American architectural firms, including Skidmore, Owings and
Merrill and Perkins and Will, but they failed to bring formal clarity to the street layout, or
create continuity between the streets and buildings. New buildings in the city center have
been burdened by the responsibility of recreating the lost heritage, and by an inability to
project a bold urban presence. Rafael Moneo’s design for the city bazaar has challenged
the separation between urban design and architecture. Public institutions that had been
built during the early independence period were retrofitted and enlarged. Many of them,
including the Sports City, the Lebanese University, and the Presidential Palace, were clad
with historicist styles, creating a link between the preservation policies of the city center
and the restoration of modern buildings. The more promising architects of this period,

including pre-civil war architects like Pierre el-Khoury (Ghazal Tower and Moritra
Residential Building) and Jacques Ligier-Belair, as well as some of the younger
architects, are experimenting with newer, more articulate building typologies for different
uses.

In the late 1990s, when a constantly changing urban fabric and a rapidly disappearing
architectural heritage seemed to undermine the search for continuity and invention, a
postwar generation of architects was also challenged by speculative tendencies and
environmental and preservation problems.

HASHIM SARKIS

Further Reading

Recent reconstruction activity in Beirut has generated extensive literature about the urban
planning process as well as a renewed interest in urban and architectural history.
Extensive research is currently being conducted in Beirut and in archives in Paris and
Istanbul, led by a new generation of historians who are already beginning to make
remarkable contributions to the understanding and reassessment of the city’s architectural

heritage.
Buheiry, Marwan R., Oxford: Centre for Lebanese Studies, 1986
Davie, May, Beirut: Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches sur le Moyen-Orient
Contemporain, 1996
Debbas, Fouad, Beirut: Naufal, 1986; as Beirut: Naufal, 1986
Khalaf, Samir, and Philip 8. Khoury (editors), Leiden and New York: E.J.Brill,
1993
Rowe, Peter G., and Hashim Sarkis (editors), Munich and New York: Prestel,
1998
Saliba, Robert, Beirut: Order of Engineers and Architects, 1998
Salibi, Kamal Suleiman, London: Taurus, and Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1988

BELGIUM

At the turn of the century, Belgian architecture played a vital role in the promotion of
modern architecture with its Art Nouveau style, developed by the pioneers Victor Horta
and Henri van de Velde. Art Nouveau was born as a reaction against the eclectic styles
that had prevailed during the 19th century, such as neoclassicism, promoted by the
academies, and neo-Gothic styles, taught at the St. Lucas Institutes.

Horta’s design for the Tassel House (1893, Brussels) already revealed all the
characteristics of this new style: a new language of elegant curvilinear forms, a dynamic
manipulation of interior spaces, and a decorative use of steel and wrought iron as
structural frames. This project brought him an influx of both private and public

commissions in Brussels such as the Maison du Peuple (1899), the architect’s own house
(1898), the Aubecq House (1899), the Van Eetvelde house (1901), and the Waucquez
Department Store (1906).

By 1895 Henri van de Velde, a prolific theorist and the first industrial designer, had
designed his own house Bloemenwerf (1895, Uccle/Ukkel, Brussels) as a (total work
of art). Designed to the smallest details, this two-story house comprises a series of
irregular polygonal rooms organized around a central hall with an upper balcony. This
spatial nucleus acts as a symbolic womb from which art could be generated from within
the family core to fight the ugliness that prevailed in contemporary society; the latter
concept would become the basic tenet of his theoretical writings.

Reacting against the exuberant curvilinear forms of Art Nouveau, the Viennese
architect Josef Hoffmann designed the Palais Stoclet (1911, Brussels) with simple and
pure cubic forms stressing their planarity and rectangularity, an implicit reference to
classicism. Although it was quite rare that an international architect would be
commissioned for a work in Belgium, this does illustrate the international recognition
Belgian architecture received before World War I.

During the Interbellum, Belgian architecture held the function of rebuilding the
country. The main task was to provide sound and hygienic houses for the working
classes. Louis van der Swaelmen (1883-1929), a landscape architect and an early town
planner, promoted the idea of garden cities. Under his direction, a number of architects
designed some of the finest examples of collective habitations. Notorious examples are
the Small Rusland Industrial District (1923, Zelzate, East Flanders) and the Kapelleveld
(1926, St-Lambrechts-Woluwe, Brussels) designed with Huib Hoste (1881-1957), the
Cité Moderne (1923, St.-Agatha-Berchem, Brussels) designed with Victor Bourgeois
(1897-1962), and the Logis (1927, Boisfort/Bosvoorde, Brussels) developed with Jean-
Jules Eggericx (1884-1963).

After his return from Germany, where during the period 1907-14 he was active in the
Kunstgewerbe of Weimar, Henri van de Velde, the precursor of the Bauhaus founded by
Gropius in 1919, would in 1926 become the first director of the Intsitut Supérieur des
Arts Décoratifs (SAD), also known as La Cambre. La Cambre was to become the
leading educational institute where most of the modern architects were trained by the
pioneers of the modern movement, such as Louis Van der Swaelmen, Huib Hoste, Victor
Bourgeois, Antoine Pompe (1873-1980), and Louis Herman De Koninck (1896-1984).

In 1930 Brussels hosted the third Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne
(CIAM) to discuss the problems of national housing developments and their relationship
to public amenities in urban areas. To seek a solution to these architectural and urban
problems was the main intent of the Charters of Athens, signed in 1933.

Individual residences remained a more graceful subject to explore the new directions
modern architecture could take. In 1927 the painter Guiette invited the French architect
Le Corbusier (1887-1965) to design his House and Studio as a variation of his Citronhan
house. Van de Velde’s built work during this period reveals a more mature modern style.
Flat roofs, rounded corners, cantilevered balconies, and carefully selected material
textures are some of the main characteristics of La Nouvelle Maison in Tervuren (1928,
Brabant). Van de Velde’s library building for the University of Ghent (1936, East
Flanders) is a concrete building that forms a landmark in the city, with its vertical
articulated tower and horizontal building volume that stretches a whole city block.

De Koninck and Bourgeois, two talented and influential architects, promoted the ideas
of functional rationalism. Because both were professors at La Cambre, their influence on
future generations of architects would be pervasive. Adapting the doctrines of Adolf
Loos, De Koninck’s projects, such as the Dotremont house (1932, Brussels), reveal a
rational synthesis of plan, a technical virtuosity, and an acute sense for spatial
composition. As meritorious as these projects are, they remained isolated instances and
failed to generate a wide following as most buildings were designed without the
intervention of an architect. It was only in 1939, just one year before the outbreak of
World War II, that an act was voted to protect the architectural profession, which in turn
led to the establishment of the Belgian Order of Architects.

After World War II, the focus once again turned to reconstruction, yet this time the
pragmatism and the logic of modernism prevailed. New building programs, major public
infrastructures, and sanitation were the main concerns in the larger cities such as
Brussels, Ghent, Antwerp, and Liége/Luik. The National Society for Low-Cost Housing
(1919), governed by politicians and technicians rather than architects, directed the
building industry. CLAM members eagerly awaited commissions to put the ideas of the
Athens Charter into practice. These architects proposed developing multistoried
buildings; however, most of the rest of the country opted for surface building. Examples
of high-rise towers for habitation are Renaat Braem’s (1910—) apartment buildings in Kiel
(1958, Antwerp); the group EGAU’s — complex in Liége/Luik (1951-70); and Willy Van
Der Meeren’s (1923-) social housing high-rise in Evere (1954, Brabant).

During the 1950s, architects exposed to the progressive movements of the
international scene experimented with individual housing projects. The English-born
architect Peter Callebout (1916-70), who produced some of the subtlest villas during the
1950s, including his Gerard House (1949, La Plante, Namur), was inspired by Japanese
architecture and influenced by Alvar Aalto. The individual residences by Jacques Dupuis
(1914-84), such as his Bertrand house (1949, Uccle/Ukkel, Brussels), reveal a more
organic approach. The modernism of La Cambre is exemplified by the work of Roger
Bastin, such as his design for the Matagne House (1950, Namen/Namur), the architect’s
own house (1960, Namur/Namen, with G.van Oost), and his St. Nicholas Chapel (1961,
Namur/Namen), with its elements of English Brutalism. The modern avant-garde, such as
Willy Van Der Meeren—an inventive constructor with a social commitment, sporadically
experimented with new formal solutions for a minimal dwelling such as the Ceca houses
(1956) in Tervuren.

Early examples of modern public buildings can be found in the coastal city of Ostend.
Its Post Office building (1953) designed by Gaston Eysselinck (1907-53); its Townhouse
(1954) by Victor Bourgeois; and its Casino (1951) by Leon Stijnen (1899-1990)
exemplify how large spatial complexes whose facades contain large portions of glass can
create a monumental style.

The 1958 World Exhibition held in Brussels celebrated the victory of modernism, with
traditional building being relegated to the Vieux Bruxelles (Old Brussels) area. New
materials such as prestressed concrete, tension wires, glass, steel, and aluminum, and
innovative structural systems such as rigid shells were exhibited to the public at large.
The Philips pavilion by Le Corbusier and Xenaxis and the Marie-Thumas pavilion by
L.J.Boucher (1929-), J.P.Blondel (1924-), and O.Filippone (1927-) illustrated how these
new systems could be adapted to host a wide variety of functions.


During the early 1960s, project developers and architects alike exploited modernism
and the International Style. Architectural practices bloomed, and an ever-spreading
growth followed, during which quantity rather than quality would prevail. The different
ideologies that had once distinguished the institutes of architectural education had all
adopted the modern International Style, and differences among them would become one
of language (Flemish versus French) rather then differences in pedagogy.

In 1968, just ten years after Expo 58, a decisive moment marked a turning point in the
Belgian architecture of the 20th century. The student revolts of May 1968 aimed to
expose the devastating consequences of a consumption society in general and that of the
International Style in particular. The project developers were held accountable for their
ever-spreading urge to destruct the old and supplant it with the new without any
consideration for social or cultural implications. The demolition of Horta’s Maison du
Peuple, in 1965, had gone by without any remarkable contest. As a result, two
organizations for historic preservation were established that same year: the St. Lucas
Archives and the Archives et Recherches de 1’ Architecture et de l’Urbanisme (ARAU).

Whereas initially these preservation efforts mainly pertained to buildings of previous
centuries, during the 1980s attention slowly moved to include buildings from the early
20th century, such as the Interbellum Foundation (1981, Ghent) and the Livres Blanes de
l’Agglomeration (1983, Brussels). The latter’s main objective was not only to preserve
but also to rehabilitate significant buildings to make them economically viable. Because
of their efforts, for example, Horta’s Wauquez Department Store (1906, Brussels) was
converted with considerable success into the Belgian Center for the Strip (1988). To
promote modern and contemporary architecture, other foundations were established such
as the Stichting Architectuur Museum in Ghent (1983), the Singel Museum in Antwerp
(1985), and the Fondation pour |’ Architecture Moderne in Brussels (1986).

After the revolts of the sixties, a new generation of architects had to search for a new
frame of reference, deal with the issues of how to integrate the old with the new, and
reassess their role in society. New campus designs for the Université de Liege, for the
Université Catholique de Louvain (UCL), and for the Free University of Brussels
(VUB/ULB) offered great opportunities to put into practice some of the answers to these
problems. The Sart Tilman campus in Liége created a new urban context with its modern
buildings such as the Hospital (1973) by Charles Vandenhove (1927-) and its Sport
complex by B.Albert (1949-). The UCL campus of Louvain-la-Neuve in Ottignies with
its human scale was modeled after the old Flemish . The new campus for the Medical
Faculties of UCL in St. Lambrechts Woluwe (1969, Brussels) offered Lucien Kroll
(1929) the opportunity to implement his methods of user participation.

Integrating modernism with classicism became the main issue during the 1970s and
1980s. Vandenhove devoted himself to create new languages of designs through the
stylistic transformation of either regional vernacular or classical styles. Examples of the
former are his own house in (Liége) built in 1961 and adapted in 1974; an example of the
latter is the Delforge House (1983, Namur), with its reference to Palladian architecture.
His assistant, Albert, designed the Villa Herzet (1985, Esneux, Liége) as a Palladian villa,
transforming it to adapt it to the sloping site yet respecting its strict bilateral symmetric
compostion. The plan is organized around a central hallway that stretches from the entry
porch in the front to the garden in the back, where it opens into a semi-circular glass
house. In Antwerp Bob van Reeth (1943—) designed the Van Roosmalen House (1988) in


reference to the house Loos designed for Josephine Baker in Paris. Located along the
terrace promenade of the Schelde, its design has an industrial maritime style with round
windows, round corners, and roof terraces reminiscent of the deck of an elegant ocean
liner.

During the 1990s, a number of Flemish architects with small practices, such as
Stephane Beel (1949-), Luc Deleu (1944—), and Paul Robbrecht (1950—) and Hilde Daem
(1950-) have gained some international recognition. The latter’s close collaborations
with artists have inspired their minimalist approach toward architecture. Noteworthy
examples are their projects for the Bacob Bank (1988) in Kerksem and the Canal Houses
(1997) in Ghent. The last decade of the century was also marked by the engineered
architecture of one of Belgium’s largest multi-disciplinary firms: Philippe Samyn (1948—)
and Partners. Their oeuvre counts numerous industrial projects such as the OCAS
Research Center for Steel Applications (1991, Zelzate, East Flanders), the Wallonian
Trade Center (1992, Marche en Famenne, Luxembourg), and the Auditorium for the Free
University of Brussels (1993). Although this oeuvre can be stylistically characterized as
High Tech, it does have some classical aspirations and claims to supply the framework in
which life’s activities can unfold.

HENDRIKA BUELINCKX

Athens Charter (1943); Brussels, Belgium; Congrés Internationaux
d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM, 1927-); Hoffman, Josef (Austria); Horta,
Victor (Belgium); Palais Stoclet, Brussels; van de Velde, Henri (Belgium)

Further Reading

Beekaert, Geert, Tielt: Lannoo, 1995
Bontridder, Albert, Antwerp: Hélios, 1963
De Kooning, Mil (editor), Ghent: University Press, 1999
Dubois, Marc, Basel: Birkhauser, 1999
Jacobs, Steven, Ghent: Ludion Press, 1998
Puttemans, Pierre, and Lucien Hervé, Brussels: Vokaer, 1974
Strauven, Francis, Louvain-la-Neuve: CRA, 1981
Van Bergeijk, Herman, and Otakar Macel, Basel: Birkhauser, 1998

BENEVOLO, LEONARDO 1923-

Architecture historian and critic, Italy

Leonardo Benevolo is one of the most prolific writers on architecture in Italy. He was
born in Orta in 1923 and graduated from the Faculty of Architecture at the University of
Rome in 1946. Throughout his distinguished career as a professor of the history of
architecture, he has taught in Rome, Florence, Venice, and at the University of Palermo.
He has written more than 20 books on architecture over the last four decades, with a

focus on urban design and the problems of the city. Although he is not as widely read as
Manfredo Tafuri or Kenneth Frampton, his books serve as important texts in the study of
20th-century architecture, both in Italy and around the world.

Since the early 1960s with Benevolo has concerned himself with the history
and transformations of the city. This book addresses the industrial city, the Utopian city,
and urban legislation in modern Europe. In 1968, with (The Architecture of Cities
in Contemporary Italy), Benevolo addressed the issues surrounding legislation problems
in Italy, the historical environment in relation to contemporary construction, and the
teaching of architecture and urban planning at the university in Italy. In the same year, his
concern with the city was the main focus of (The Architecture of the Renaissance),
with chapters on the ideal city and urban transformations in the 16th century. Here
Benevolo also focused on the evolution of architectural styles, the invention of new
architectures, and the architectural principles of varying periods.

In the early 1970s, Benevolo published (The Adventures of the City), addressing
the problems of the relation between the historical center of the city and the (outskirts),
and the decline and degradation of the Italian city following World War II. Many of the
problems of the city are attributed to territorial organizations, which result from the
interests of public administrators and private landowners, and are perpetuated by obsolete
institutions and customs in Italian society. In 1960 Benevolo published his
(Introduction to Architecture), in which he explained the constructive principles of
architecture in relation to its historical contexts, examining a range of contexts and
surveying architectural types including Greek, Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine,
Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Mannerism, baroque, neo-classical, and modern.

is a well-illustrated, four-volume opus of the history of the city divided into
antique, medieval, modern, and contemporary periods. The work is an attempt to explain
the origin of the city and to tell the basic story of the development of the built
environment in the history of civilization. It is intended for the average reader as well as
scholars and professionals in the fields of architecture and urban planning. Written in
1960, his two-volume (History of Modern Architecture) has significantly impacted
the architectural history of the 20th century for the last four decades. The first volume
(1760-1914) examines town planning, engineering, and the emergence of the skyscraper
and the avant-garde prior to World War I. The second volume (1914-66) isolates the
canon of architects and buildings that characterize the Modern movement. Other books
that have been translated into English are and . These analyze the built
environment at every level, from the room to the city, and consider the relation between
the built environment and the process of design.

In the mid-1980s, Benevolo published (The Final Chapter of Modern
Architecture). The title of the book refers to the years 1970-85 and the work of individual
architects, such as Kenzo Tange, James Stirling, Charles Moore, and Robert Venturi, and
in Italy, Vitto- rio Gregotti, Renzo Piano, Paolo Portoghesi, and Aldo Rossi. Benevolo
analyzes the tendencies of their work and their personalities in order to synthesize the
realizations and problems of contemporary architecture. He frames his discussion of the
work of this period with a discussion of the late work of the masters of modern
architecture: Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and Mies van der Rohe.

In the early 1990s, Benevolo refocused his attention on the problems and development
of the city. In (The Italian City in the Renaissance), he analyzes the transformations


undergone by Italian cities during the 16th century, with a detailed examination and
comparison of city plans from that period. In (The City in the History of Europe),
Benevolo addresses, in more technical terms, issues such as the detachment of the
modern world from the ancient world, the idea of the city in classical culture, and the
transformations of the city during the Roman Empire. He analyzes the use of perspectival
construction in the Renaissance city and the adjustments made necessary by the rules of
perspective. He looks at new types of cities, such as the coastal city, the international
city, and the industrial city, and addresses the issues facing Europe in confrontation with
the new world of the 20th century.

Benevolo is most certainly a historian dedicated to the ideas of the Modern movement
and is considered among the most influential writers on architecture and urban planning
and the history of the city in the 20th century, in Italy. In his preface to he writes,
“The task of a history of modern architecture is to present contemporary events within the
framework of their immediate precursors; it must, therefore, go far enough into past
history to make a complete understanding of the present possible and to set contemporary
events in adequate historical perspective.”

JOHN HENDRIX
Frampton, Kenneth (United States); Gregotti, Vittorio (Italy); Moore,
Charles (United States); Piano, Renzo (Italy); Rossi, Aldo (Italy); Tafuri,
Manfredo (Italy); Tange, Kenzo (Japan); Urban Planning; Venturi, Robert
(United States)

Biography

Born in Orta, Italy, 1923. Graduated from the Faculty of Architecture at the University of
Rome in 1946. Taught in Rome, Florence, and Venice; professor of the history of
architecture at the University of Palermo 2000.

Selected Publications

1960
2 vols., 1960; new edition, 1999; as 2 vols., translated by H.J.Landry, 1971
1963; as translated by Judith Landry, 1967
1968; 2nd edition, 1970
2 vols., 1968; 9th edition, 1993; as 2 vols., translated by Judith Landry, 1978
1969; new edition, 1990
1971
1973; 2nd edition, 1974
1975; new edition, 1993; as _ translated by Geoffrey Culverwell, 1980
1976; 5th edition, 1988
1979
1979
1985

1993
translated by Carl Ipsen, 1993

Further Reading

Ehresmann, Donald L., Littleton, Colorado: Libraries Unlimited, 1984
Irace, Fulvio, “Interview with Leonardo Benevolo,” 668 (January 1986)
Madanipour, Ali, Chichester, West Sussex, and New York: Wiley, 1996
Morton, P.A., “Pragmatism and Provinciality: Italian Criticism of the American Plan,” 4
(1983)

Sutcliffe Anthony, London: Mansell, 1981
Trebbi, Giorgio, “An Archaeological Park for Rome,” 146 (May 1986)

BENETTON FACTORY, ITALY

Designed by Alfra and Tobia Scarpa; 1967—

The Benetton Corporation was a groundbreaking manufacturer both in terms of their
interest in design and the transition from manufacturer of goods to the making of a
service industry toward the idea of service-oriented production industries of the late 20th
century, which created a culture around a product. Their advanced, just-in-time
production and continual flow of goods from manufacturing to distribution influenced the
layout, design, and siting of their facilities. Spanning three decades of development, these
complexes in Treviso, Northern Italy, were designed by Alfra and Tobia Scarpa,
architects and industrial designers, who designed not only the factory and administration
buildings, but also developed with Benetton a new approach to retail design, which was
initiated with their international franchises in the 1960s.

Tobia Scarpa designed the first factory building for Benetton in 1967 in Paderno di
Ponzano, Treviso, with Christiano Gasparetto and Carlo Maschietto. The complex,
adjacent to an historic villa, comprises an administration building and manufacturing
facility identified by the different roofscapes for the two building typologies, setting up a
dialogue between the two functions, while creating a sense of the whole site.

The manufacturing facility’s primary structure is a girder and parallel series of X-
shaped prefabricated concrete beams. The X-shaped beams, 1.3 meters high by 1.3
meters wide with the profile exposed, have skylight glazing in the interstices, bringing
light to the manufacturing floor. The beams are supported on the 84-meter-long hollow
girder for the entire length of the building, forming the main axis, and by perimeter 9.2-
meter-high precast panels walls with a C-shaped section. The X-shaped beams, with their
sloped angles, reflect light in the interior and have the double duty of integrating the
building systems of pipes and electric wiring through the hollow channel.

The long beam identifies a streetlike spine for local circulation and a wider delivery
area bracketed by the production areas. The success of this layout led to its continued use

for three additional facilities. Variation in the manufacturing space, through paving and
spatial divisions, makes a comfortable rather than overbearing work space.

A courtyard links the manufacturing hall to the administrative offices, a custodian
house, and the heating plant. Capping the offices, the architects designed pyramidal roofs
with cupola skylights by assembling three triangular 3-inch-thick prefabricated concrete
panels, each with a base of 3.9 or 4.5 meters, recalling the surrounding domestic
landscape. Reference to the local context is also made evident in the rustic waddle and
dab walls, with the sticks still visible.

In 1986 this complex was renovated and expanded to house prototype production,
offices for the computer systems, a conference center, a meeting room, and the runways
for fashion shows. A 600-car underground garage reduces the use of automobiles at the
site and creates unobstructed views to the site. Pedestrian pathways over ramps and
arched bridges above water channels create “streets” to lead to displays of Benetton
prototype stores.

In 1993-95 Benetton hired the Scarpas to build a two-part manufacturing facility in
Castrette di Villorba, Treviso, based on the same layouts as the earlier factories.
Castrette’s singularity lies in the structural system and unobstructed production space
employing a high-tech industrial aesthetic and materiality. The single-story complex was
built as two identical 18,000-meter-squared manufacturing buildings in seven, 25-meter
modules based on the dimensions of the cotton machines. The factory layout has three
distinct areas—centralized assembly, a central roadway spine, and two production areas.
The just-in-time production method made the access key to the site, so the architects
made the central spine a 40-meter-wide roadway, larger than the earlier factory.

To achieve the essential flexible and unobstructed manufacturing space, the architects
employed a structural system developed by Bridon Ropes of Doncaster, England,
normally used for bridges and here used for the first time for a factory building. A
reinforced concrete pier in the center of each of the seven modules anchors pairs of 25-
meter-high steel pylons from which thin steel cables extend to brace the trussed roof. The
roof trusses are, in turn, supported on the exterior reinforced concrete walls. The walls
are clad with insulated ribbed galvanized steel, creating a horizontal emphasis to the
complex. The steel manufacturers dipped the panels in zinc coating to create a
herringbone pattern resembling woven fabrics, symbolic of the activity inside. The
architects recessed the building under overhanging metal eaves with a wide cantilever
over the loading street. On the east and west facades the shed module profile is exposed
in the framework of the seven bays. They were also concerned with maintaining the
vistas and the landscape, so they lowered the building into the earth for a lower profile. In
the below-ground spaces, large skylights illuminate the workers’ cafeteria.

The exposed high-tech structure also conceals in its wall panel system a high-tech
building technology system of robotic production and computer controls in a fiber-optic
cables network and electronic systems. In the 1990s the highly automated sys-tem
provided information to the administrative offices for the control of 7,500 items every
eight hours as they were distributed to Benetton’s 7,000 selling points in the world. Both
visually and structurally, the building expresses the design, manufacturing, and
distribution process of an innovative company.

NINA RAPPAPORT

Factory

Further Reading

“Scarpa: Stabilimento Benetton a Castrette,” no. 328 (1994)
“Scarpa: New Benetton Factory,” Castrette, no. 38 (1994)
“Una Presenza Forte,” 28 (1993)
Zardini, Mirko, “Benetton,” no. 85 (1995)

BERLAGE, HENDRIK PETRUS 1856-1934

Architect, Netherlands

Hendrik Petrus Berlage was one of the most significant European architects before
World War I. Often considered the father of modern architecture in the Netherlands,
Berlage greatly influenced a generation of architects that included J.J.P.Oud, Gerrit
Rietveld, and Mies van der Rohe. His work is known for its transition from 19th-century
historicism to new styles and theories of modern architecture. While his early designs
were revivalist Dutch Renaissance, in the 1890s Berlage rejected historicism to
experiment instead with stylistically innovative forms. Often considered a rationalist,
Berlage was similarly noted for his restrained use of ornament and his insistence that the
exterior of a building express its interior, functional design. Berlage was a pioneer in the
development of 20th-century architecture, and many of his buildings are Dutch cultural
landmarks.

Berlage’s career falls into three periods: 1878 to 1903, his early work through the
completion of the Amsterdam Exchange; 1903 to 1919, his mature period through the
termination of his work for the Kréller-Miiller family; and his late work from 1920 to
1934, when he turns to Cubist forms. Berlage received his formal architectural training at
the Ziirich Polytechnic. After extensive travels, he began working in the Amsterdam
office of Theo Sanders. When Sanders retired in 1889, Berlage opened an independent
office. His first major commission was the purely historicist De Algemeene office
building in Amsterdam. His experiments with restrained, stylized historical forms
culminated in the Amsterdam Exchange. The five successive Exchange designs (1884—
98) show Berlage’s transformation from historicism to modernism. Beginning as a Dutch
Renaissance palace, the Exchange became an original design, reinterpreting, abstracting,
and subjecting historical forms to new ideas about proportion and materials. The
Exchange uses a proportional grid of triangular prisms that harmonizes and unifies the
exterior. In conception, it drew on history as well, as Berlage sought to adapt a native
form for 20th-century use. The first exchanges in the Low Countries had been open
courtyards. Berlage kept that basic idea with glass-roofed trading halls surrounded by
brick arcades.

After 1913 Berlage became “house architect” for the wealthy Kréller-Miiller family
and designed several innovative buildings, including the Holland House in London and
St. Hubertus near Otterlo. The London building code required that Berlage cover Holland
House’s steel frame. He chose terra-cotta plates to fill the space and frame the windows.

Inside, movable walls divided the office space. Both were innovations. St. Hubertus was
an extravagant hunting lodge; its plan takes the form of stylized antlers in reference to the
story of St. Hubertus and the stag. The monumental conception has been linked to
Wright’s designs.

After 1920 Berlage’s work began to favor geometry even more vigorously. The best
examples of this are the First Church of Christ, Scientist, and the Municipal Museum,
both in The Hague. Both buildings are assemblages of cubic prisms in which geometry
replaces historical quotations. Another late work is the Amstel Bridge, designed as part of
his plan for Amsterdam South. The bridge was a joint effort between Berlage and the city
engineer’s office and was praised by contemporaries as a socially productive
collaboration between state and artist promising cooperation for the future. It combines a
decorated bridge with park space for water recreation.

Both 19th-century theorists and 20th-century innovators influenced Berlage. He drew
inspiration from Gottfried Semper and Viollet-le-Duc, who admired the organic harmony
and holistic creativity of great architecture of the past but who also criticized the cut-and-
paste pattern-book copying that had come to dominate 19th-century architecture.
Similarly, Berlage argued that the architect should shape useful spaces rather than
decorate facades. In his view, a building should express its function from the interior
outward rather than allow surface details to dictate room arrangement. Through lectures
and essays describing his American travels, Berlage was the first major European
architect to publicly declare his interest in the American innovations of Louis Sullivan
and Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright’s work particularly affected Berlage, confirming the
path toward geometric architecture that he had already begun.

Berlage is thus an excellent example of an architect negotiating between the ancients
and the moderns. He was interested in developing a newer architectural vocabulary in
step with the 20th century while also retaining links to the historical past. His best-known
works are modern but based in traditional forms. After 1890 he began to decorate his
buildings with geometric, stylized historical motifs. Preferring simple materials to
imitations and noting that “genuine plaster is better than false marble” ( 1904), he
liked to use materials in accordance with their natural features. Conversely, he disliked
bentwood and the plaster concealment of structural elements, as the exposed iron
supports in the trading rooms of the Amsterdam Exchange demonstrate. Berlage was
especially fond of brick, a material traditionally associated with Dutch architecture. He
retained this link to the past, but he used brick in unorthodox ways, particularly by
exposing it as an interior wall element in residences, for example, the Villa Henny (1898)
in The Hague. Brick gave mass, strength, and an organic pattern to architectural designs
that were intrinsic to the material, not an applied ornament.

Berlage believed that the architect had a social responsibility to improve
living conditions. Consequently, beginning around 1900, his interests
expanded to include city planning as a means of social amelioration,
resulting in expansion plans for several Dutch cities, of which only the
plan for South Amsterdam (1915-17) was implemented. Social concerns
affected Berlage’s interior design as well, which is known for its
geometric focus. He explicitly avoided the vegetative forms popular with

Art Nou-


Holland House (W.H.Muller office
building), London, designed by
Hendrik P.Berlage (1915)

© GreatBuildings.com

veau designers, such as Victor Horta and Henri van de Velde in Belgium, and he was a
founder of the anti-Art Nouveau reform design store ‘t Binnenhuis (the Interior). He was
interested in higher aesthetic standards for ordinary objects such as furniture, carpets,
books, dishes, and wall coverings and made many designs. His work influenced De Stijl
designers, although there was periodic hostility between Berlage and leading figures
associated with De Stil.
TIMOTHY PURSELL

Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); De Stijl; Horta, Victor (Belgium); Mies van
der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Oud, J.J.P.(Netherlands); Rietveld, Gerrit
(Netherlands); Sullivan, Louis (United States); van de Velde, Henri

(Belgium); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Biography

Born in Amsterdam, 21 February 1856. Studied painting, Rijksakademie van Beeldende
Kunsten, Amsterdam 1874-75; studied architecture under Gottfried Semper’s followers
at the Bauschule, Eidgenéssische Polytechnikum (now Eidgendéssische Technische
Hochschule), Zurich 1875-78; traveled Germany 1879; traveled Italy 1880-81. Married
Marie Bienfait 1887. Worked in Arnhem, Netherlands 1879; associate, later designer,
office of Theodorus Sanders, Amsterdam 1881-84; partnership with Sanders 1884-89;

private practice, The Hague and Amsterdam 1889-1934; after 1899, became involved
primarily in urban planning; worked for Miiller and Company, traders, Rotterdam 1913—
19. Awarded Gold Medal, Royal Institute of British Architects 1932. Died in The Hague,
12 August 1934.

Selected Works

Office Building De Algeemene, Amsterdam, 1892
Office Building De Nederlanden van 1845, The Hague, 1895
Villa Henny, The Hague, 1898
Diamond Workers’ Union Building, Amsterdam, 1900
Amsterdam Exchange, 1903
Headquarters for Wm. Miller and Co. “Holland House,” London, 1915
Expansion Plan for Amsterdam South, 1917
St. Hubertus Hunting Lodge, Otterlo, 1920
Mercatorplein, Amsterdam, 1925
First Church of Christ, Scientist, The Hague, 1926
Amstel Bridge or Berlage Bridge, Amsterdam, 1932
Municipal Museum, The Hague, 1935

Selected Publications

1904
1905
1908
1909
1910
1911
“Neure amerikanische Baukunst,” 60, nos. 11-13 (1912)
“Art and the Community,” 18 (1912)
“Foundations and Development of Architecture,” 18 (1912)
1913
1918
1919
(a translated anthology), 1996

Further Reading

Bazel, K.P.C. de, et al., Rotterdam: Brusse, 1916
Berlage, Hendrik Petrus, Rotterdam: Brusse, 1925
Bock, Manfred, Wiesbaden: Steiner, and The Hague: Staatsuitgeverij, 1983
Bock, Manfred, | Amsterdam: Meulenhoff/Landshoff, 1987;as = Amsterdam:
Architectura and Natura Press, 1992

Polano, Sergio, Milan: Electa, 1987; as translated by Marie-Héléne Agiieros
and Mayta Munson, London: Butterworth, and New York: Rizzoli, 1988

Reinink, Adriaan W., (with English summary), The Hague: Staatsuitgeverij, 1975
Singelenberg, Pieter, Utrecht: Haentjens Dekker and Gumbert, 1972 (an important
monograph)

Singelenberg, Pieter, (exhib. cat.), The Hague: Haags Gemeentemuseum, 1975

BERLIN, GERMANY

Reciprocal reasons justify historians emphasizing the modern era when studying Berlin’s
architectural history: the sheer amount built and the sheer amount destroyed. Unique
among European capitals, Berlin exemplifies both formative dynamism and annihilative
zest. Between the German unification and reunification (1871-1991), razing spoke as
much as raising—and each still speaks today.
In 1800 Berlin was still a moderate, regional city. Centuries of accommodating the
Hohenzollern and their baroque and neo-classical edifices (by Schiilters and Schinkel,
respectively) added dignity, not development. However, by 1900, Berlin emerged a
continental parvenu—an empire seat whose aggregate population had multiplied 15 times
(from 170,000 to 2.7 million), making it Europe’s third-ranked metropolis and possibly
the most densely inhabited. Heavy industry and railway centraliza tion induced
immigration, necessitating rapid, blanketing, polycentric growth. (rental barracks)
distended outward from the historical kernel on vast blocks. These massive tenements
(sometimes of six stories and five communicating courtyards) housed 90 percent of
Berliners. Urbanist Werner Hegemann decried this human warehousing. Uncontrolled
speculation overran planning; fervid rebuilding followed demolition. Metropolitan Berlin
became an amnesic place. A newly emerging citizen, the roamed bustling streets;
sociologists (Franz Hessel and Georg Simmel) were fascinated and repelled. The only
parallel to Berlin’s demographic and economic dynamism was Chicago—a comparison
Mark Twain made. Historical Berlin’s attrition, of course, ultimately resulted from more
than this recycling. The only parallel in warfare, ruination, and division was, ironically,
Jerusalem—a comparison Harry Truman made.
Berlin’s “tradition of no traditions” spawned the 20th century’s preeminent
architectural avant-garde. There was so much to build and so few precedents. While the
9th century’s dawning brought Berlin Schinkel’s brilliance, its ending offered no
comparison. Wilhelmine architecture (1888-1918), named for Germany’s last Kaiser,
Wilhelm II, was an unsteady, eclectic transplant. Wallot’s bombastic Reichstag (1884—
94) and Kark and Raschdorff’s s grandiose Cathedral (1894-1905) were much criticized.
Jugendstil barely touched Berlin despite Henry van de Velde’s brief stay. Bland, stuccoed
brick boxes defined the city. Hints toward a purposefully “reductive” architecture existed,
such as Alfred Messel’s Wertheim Department Store (1904). Radicalism flourished
unchallenged within Berlin’s aesthetic neutrality. World War I reinforced this. Although
many nations were startled into modernity by mechanized war, Germany (like another


subsequent architectural avant-garde center, Russia) abandoned its conservative political
and social institutions through abandoning its monarchy.

Heavy industry’s futurism imprinted Berlin’s architecture. Berlin rode the industrial
revolution’s second wave, a half century after England’s first push. Berlin meant not
spinning mills but combustion engines, electricity, and intraurban transportation. The
world’s first electric trolley originated here (1881). In this utilitarian (factory city),
functionalism was the natural order. To prosper, new building tasks—the industrial elite’s
manufacturing facilities, the consumer bourgeoisie’s department stores and offices, and
the proletariat’s mass housing—needed solutions. Berlin’s technological ascendancy
paralleled the rise of steel, glass, and reinforced concrete. A city still becoming, not
being, Berlin liberally explored these new typologies and materials.

Berlin’s 20th-century architectural pageant was not just prescient but stylistically
comprehensive. Berlin respected “orthodox” modernism’s mode (Bauhaus
rationalism/functionalism) but also cherished modernism’s “other? mode
(organicism/keneticism). Only 20th-century Helsinki—through Alvar Aalto—could
compare in dedication to naturalistic automatism. Berlin bred strident variants of both the
“orthodox” and “other” modes: (the New Objectivity) and Expressionism.
Collaborative groups offered solidarity among cacophony. Although Germany overall
excelled at this (as the Deutsche Werkbund’s Munich 1907 founding shows), Berlin after
World War I particularly fostered associations: Walter Gropius’s “Arbeitsrat fiir Kunst”
(1918, later fused with the propagandist “Novembergruppe”); Hugo Haring and Mies van
der Rohe’s antiestablishment “Der Ring” (1924); and Bruno Taut, Paul Scheerbart, and
Hans Scharoun’s Glaserne Kette (Glass Chain, 1919-—20)—this last an Utopian euphoria
dedicated to crystalline mountain forms. Peter Behrens, Erich Mendelsohn, Hans Poelzig,
and Ludwig Hilberseimer plied these circles. Berlin’s commitment to competitions also
fostered diversity (continuing into today). Paper architecture thrived. Vying visionary
alternatives brought everything before the public. Architecture’s exuberance paralleled
Berlin’s arts—the Dada montagists’ nihilism, the German Expressionist painters’
ferocious hues, Fritz Lang’s metropolitan expose films, and Bertolt Brecht’s theater of
critical verity.

Straddling World War I, two successive architectural revolutions swept
Berlin. First came Behrens’s reification of the industrial “idea.” His AEG
Turbine Factory (1908-09) created an unexpectedly monumental temple
celebrating mass production. Behrens’s atelier (where Gropius and Mies
schooled) transformed Berlin-Moabit into the world’s most technical and
representational industrialized district. Berlin became symbolic: no mere
metropolis but an “electropolis.” The second revolution, after the war,
posited and probed the aesthetic binary of versus Expressionism—a

stylistic controversy em


Neue Nationalgalerie, detail (New
National Gallery), designed by Mies
van der Rohe (1962-68)

© Randall Ott

broiling Mendelsohn, Poelzig, Mies, and others, with Gropius contributing from the
Bauhaus. During the Weimar Republic, Berlin focused Europe’s avant-garde
architectural debate. The volumetric clarity and dryly “objective” tectonic of Mies’s
Concrete Office proposal (1922-23) countered against the organic complexity of
Poelzig’s Grosses Schauspielhaus (1919) and Mendelsohn’s Einstein Tower (1920-24) in
Potsdam. Yet positions fluctuated. Mendelsohn, although inspired by relativity’s
indeterminacy at Potsdam, celebrated constructional pragmatism in his Luckenwalde Hat
Factory (1921-23). Mies’s 1921 Friedrichstrasse Competition project simultaneously
presented the competing aesthetics in stark, orthographic stalemate: unrelenting
rationalism in section intersected by exuberant Expressionism in plan. Here, Mies fed a
Glass Chain crystal through a _ slicer, saving and stacking only the repetitive segments
from its middle girth. Gropius also vacillated. Expressionist balconies blurred his 1922
unbuilt Chicago Tribune Competition entry’s tectonic lucidity. Gradually, Berlin
architects reached better syntheses—Emil Fahrenkamp’s Shellhaus office block (1930-

31) or Mendelsohn’s commercial Columbushaus (1931-32). The very fact that Berlin
architects promoted commercial architecture to an aesthetically significant task was as
important as this stylistic debate.

Weimar Berlin did not ignore social issues during this aesthetic deliberation. In
addition to “representing” elite industries and bourgeois commerce, Berlin sought
eminence in proletariat housing. Berlin’s spawned a “back-to-the-earth” reform
movement favoring decentralization. Like other German cities (such as Frankfurt under
Ernst May), Berlin took inspiration from Raymond Unwin’s pleas for rural tranquility.
Conditions were so adverse that benevolent paternalism during late imperial Berlin
generated several outlying (low-density settlements of minimum dwellings infused with
light and air). Results accelerated with the Republic. Companies began paternalistically
sponsoring employee housing; gradually boroughs took over, then the city. (1919-20),
an early collaboration between Martin Wagner (soon to be Berlin’s Building
Commissioner) and Bruno Taut (of Cologne’s 1914 Werkbund Exhibition fame), had
“Nuremberg” roofs and gables that mimicked “bourgeois-traditional” aesthetics. In 1920
Berlin became Greater Berlin; 93 separate polities united, creating the legal means to
reconfigure what was now physically the largest city in Europe. Promulgating tax and
interest relief, the Social Democrats engendered cooperatives such as GEHAG (Public
Benefit Homestead, Savings, and Building Corporation). These, in aggregate, realized
135,000 units housing 500,000 people between 1924 and 1930.

Most famous was Wagner and Taut’s GEHAG-sponsored (Horseshoe) of garden
walk-ups in outlying Britz (1925-31). Its open community green spaces and shared
facilities were socially progressive. Modernist aesthetics also appeared—continuous flat
roofs, horizontal lines, clean surfaces, and cantilevers. Taut felt that this appearance
manifested the complex’s collective goals. Similar followed, such as Wagner, Taut, and
Haring’s (1926-32) in Zehlendorf, again GEHAG sponsored. By 1928, with the
housing crisis still deteriorating citywide, this low-scaled density was questioned.
Wagner speculated that only (taller, denser developments) could answer the need. The
Bauhaus-affiliated trio of Gropius, Hilberseimer, and Marcel Breuer pro duced high-rise
competition studies for Berlin reaching to 18 stories. Although no tall slabs materialized,
projects of over four stories (lacking immediate access to the ground) appeared on
superblocks nearer the city center, subdivided into “row form” configurations prefiguring
modernism’s later repetitiveness, scalelessness, and obsessiveness (regarding solar
orientation). Greater density did allow further collectivist gestures, such as centralized
mechanical plants.


Neue Nationalgalerie, designed by
Mies van der Rohe (1962-68)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

Compared with Stuttgart’s Weissenhofsiedlung (1927), these projects were technically
conservative. Early talk of Fordist/Taylorist production methods was set aside. The
emphasis remained on social issues and their aesthetic representation. Modernism’s
revolutionary “new style” was often conflated with the “new society” during Weimar, as
Lane (1968) details, resulting in a highly politicized, even propagandistic, architecture.
Government support reinforced this reading. The Nazis took note, deriding Weimar
housing’s appearance as “Bolshevist.” Berlin’s Communist Party, ironically, had nothing
to do with these projects because it opposed any accommodation with the “corrupt”
bourgeois system.

The 1930-31 worldwide economic collapse halted Berlin’s social housing experiment,
leaving the Nazis to beat a dead horse. Just as the “Brown” cloud approached, Berlin’s
1931 Building Exhibition (titled “Dwelling of Our Time’) introduced modernism to a
wider audience. Berlin’s historicist tradition of outstanding villas in suburban districts
(Hermann Muthesius’s 1907-08 half-timbered Haus Freudenberg or Behrens’s 1911-12
classical Haus Wiegand) had already been updated with Hans and Wassili Luckhardt’s Le
Corbusian Zwei Einfamilienhaduser (1928) and Mendelsohn’s Expressionist Haus
Sternefeld (1924). Yet the 1931 Exhibition publicly interjected “Bolshevist” aesthetics
into bourgeois—as opposed to proletariat—homes. Mies translated his German Pavilion
at Barcelona into a lush exhibit house that the Nazis labeled a “horse stable.”

Though grand planners, Berlin’s Nazis built little. Only bits survive—such as Ernst
Sagebiel’s Aviation Ministry (1936-37) and Tempelhof Airport (1936-41). Hitler
impacted modernism not through buildings but inadvertently through expellant “gifts”
(mostly to the United States—Gropius, Mies, and ultimately Mendelsohn). Although

architecture—the “Word in Stone”—was critical to Hitler’s ideological program, it
proved too costly after his war machine’s ignition. Still, until the bitter end, Hitler
crouched as amateur architect over vast models with his amanuensis, Albert Speer. How
sad for the profession that the 20th-century leader most architecturally impassioned was a
tasteless criminal. Hitler’s architectural proclivities were vivid—a reactionary
parochialism intended to resist “Bolshevist” cosmopolitanism and a_perdurable
monumentality in keeping with world domination. As Nazi preferences hardened, the
Dessau Bauhaus was chased to Berlin (during Mies’s directorate), where the Gestapo
finally padlocked it. Nazi aesthetics mirrored—with opposing predilection—the Weimar
Socialists’ belief that architectural style symbolized specific political views. However,
the Nazis added a destructive, racist edge. The Nazi-fomented (Night of Broken Glass,
1938) saw 9 of 12 Berlin synagogues aflame, including Ehrenfried Hessel’s famed
Fasanenstrafe Temple (1912).

Speer’s New Chancellery expansion (1938-39) housed Hitler. Stretching an
intimidating quarter mile, its 480-foot gallery doubled the length of Versailles’ Hall of
Mirrors. Hypertrophy drained Speer’s classicism of all humanism (entasis, for example,
disappeared). Megalomania roamed across Speer’s unrealized “Germania” Berlin Plan
(1937-42). This north/south avenue connected an 825-foot-diameter rotunda and 400-
foot-high triumphal arch. Contemporary praise of Speer (Krier, 1985) ignores his errors.
Speer blithely muffed axial transitions any Beaux-Arts journeyman could manage.
Existing conditions at the Chancellery necessitated a slight axial rotation. Speer properly
positioned a “Round Hall” to resolve this, then neglected to utilize it, merely crimping the
bend within the . Where his Berlin Plan’s axis turned, he positioned his gargantuan
rotunda but again earned no profit. The existing Reichstag, which Hitler wanted
incorporated into “Germania,” had been built several degrees shy of due north/south.
Speer merely ignored this, causing one side of his grand plaza to warp bizarrely. Speer’s
architectural goose-stepping could successfully accommodate only 4 of the 360 compass
degrees.

In 1943 the Western Allies launched the aerial Battle of Berlin. By 1945 incendiary
phosphorous had consumed 70 percent of the city’s center and 1.5 million Berliners’
homes. Soviet shelling came next, then tanks and capitulation. Only outlying and
escaped unscathed. “Quadrasectioning” ensued; apportionments observed Berlin’s 20
districts—six falling American, four British, two French, and eight Soviet (including the
historical kernel containing Schinkel’s battered works). From Berlin’s ceremonial
remnants, ideological sterilization claimed further shares. Between 1947 and 1951, the
standing walls of the Hohenzollern Stadtschloss and Hitler’s New Chancellery in the
Soviet sector and the Gestapo’s headquarters at the Prinz-Albrecht-Palais (once renovated
by Schinkel) in the American were dynamited.

Devastation opened possibilities for restructuring the unplanned Moloch that Berlin
had become. The Soviets, first on the scene, named Scharoun “City Architect.” Though
he would serve a mere year, the former Glass Chain Expressionist gained prominence in
postwar Berlin. Immediately, he formed the which by 1946 proposed the city’s
dissolution into more manageable, picturesquely “organic” neighborhoods. Rubble
clearance and infrastructure rigidity prevented any action. After losing his post, Scharoun
pressed forward with a lyrical housing plan (1949) for the bombed-out, Soviet-controlled
Friedrichshain district. However, as the Communist’s massive Berlin-Treptow victory


monument (1947-48) foretold, modernism had scant future in the Soviet sector. In the
Soviet Union, the “Constructivist versus traditionalist” debate ended by 1934; socialist
realism’s pseudoclassicism triumphed. Once East Germany achieved statehood with East
Berlin as capital (1949), the Stalinist aesthetic of “Progressive Tradition” was imposed.
Apparatchiks attacked modernism (both Berliner modes) as formalist, cosmopolitan, and
decadent. Scharoun’s Friedrichshain plan was shelved. Stalinallee (1952-60) emerged
instead—a mile-long avenue of housing reminiscent of Moscow’s Gorky Street, with
sculpted street walls of symmetrically ponderous, tripartite, pilastered facades by various
architectural cooperatives (spearheaded by Hermann Henselmann, a chameleon who had
conveniently renounced his own Bauhaus work).
As division’s reality settled in, the West responded with show-piece housing of its
own: the 1957 Interbau Hansaviertel district (a western bombed-out zone). A consciously
international team of 53 architects representing 14 countries (including Aalto and Oscar
Niemeyer) created a medley of loosely grouped, reinforced-concrete point blocks and
slabs. Yet Hansaviertel’s Progressivism rapidly seemed as superficially clichéd as
Stalinallee’s regressive pomposity. Conventional flats, dressed in gratuitously variegated
balcony rhythms, rested on Le Corbusiersian stilts. For the same exhibition but on a
distant site, Le Corbusier gave West Berlin an “authentic” knockoff of his Marseilles .
Also for the exhibition, the United States presented Berlin with Hugh Stubbins’s
Kongresshalle (1956—57)—a suspended hyperbolic paraboloid that became something of
a technological “gift horse” when one arch collapsed in 1980. More evocative of
modermism’s continued viability was Egon Eiermannn’s  Kaiser-Wilhelm-
Gedachtniskirche reconstruction (Memorial Church, 1957-63). Movingly preserving
fragments of the bombing’s “zero hour,” when time stopped, this dark stained-glass
honey-comb increasingly became the unofficial architectural symbol of West Berlin’s
island vigil. Western dreams of urban reunification continued with the Hauptstadt Berlin
competition ignoring the city’s division (1959).
In 1954 Nikita Khrushchev began attacking Stalinist architecture.
Modernist slabs gradually rose in East Berlin. Yet just as the ideological
combatants’ aesthetics aligned, physical separation heightened. In 1961 a
102.5-mile “Wall”—Berlin’s most famously infamous edifice—encircled
the Western enclave as an “Antifascist Protective Barrier.” The Cold War
stalemate’s face, it became the 20th century’s most sublimely meaningful
construction. As Baker (1993) notes, the Wall evolved through several
“generations.” First came an improvised breeze block and barbed-wire
barrier. Next was a “lollipop” profile of stacked, prefabricated, asbestos-
stoked concrete panels crowned with a rounded pipe denying purchase to
grappling hooks. Last was a massively prefabricated L section, also round
capped, with its foot pointing toward East Berlin to prevent overturning in
an imagined Western attack (and also escape by digging). Formidable as
these variants became, it was open space, not the Wall, that killed (122 or
more times). The Wall delimited a death strip (often hundreds of meters
wide, with watchtowers, lights, and dog runs), sandwiched by a second


barrier of concrete or barbed wire. This strip necessitated demolition of
many square miles of East Berlin’s adjoining neighborhoods, including
churches. To West Berlin, only the smooth backside of the L showed—the
ultimate in aesthetics, soon daubed with gorgeous graffiti.
Standardization of construction components passed a critical test at the
Wall. Gradually, satellite towns of grim, cratelike prefabricated housing
ringed the East (the of Marzhan, Hohenschénhausen, and Hellersdorf).
The West’s satellites, Markisches Viertel (1963-74) and Gropiusstadt
(1962-72), bared similarity.

Absolute division exacerbated Berlin’s preexisting polycentrism. Through rival
“centers,” both ideologies sought urban “wholeness.” The East’s path was governmental
and bland; the West’s cultural and heterogeneous. In the old kernel, the Communists’
curtain-wall “Palace of the Republic” usurped the site of the Hohenzollern Stadtschloss.
Schinkel’s Bauakademie was razed (1961-62), making way for the Foreign Ministry’s
morose white slab. A symbolically assertive 365-meter Television Tower (1965-69) leapt
from nearby Alexanderplatz. Vast seas of empty pavement awaited rallies. The West,
lacking federal presence, responded with Kulturforum—a diffusely suburbanized zone,
where Scharoun’s ecstatic Philharmonic and Staatsbibliothek (1960-63, 1967-76) jostled
with Mies’s silent Neue National-galerie (1965-68). Expressionism again confronted
Swathes of arterial green space, as crippling to urbanism as the East’s barren plazas, ran
between. Nearby, Hentrich and Petschnigg’s Europa Center (1965), an echo of Skidmore,
Owings and Merrill’s New York Lever House, capped the chic Kiirfurstendamm.
American design principles settled heavily on West Berlin.

Postmodernism in West Berlin invoked “critical reconstruction” as urban tonic.
Promoted by Josef Paul Kleihues (1987), this “anti-Hansaviertel” methodology respected
traditional street lines and block heights in healing rent urban fabric. Its manifestation
was the IBA (International Building Exposition, 1984-87), celebrating Berlin’s 750th
anniversary. Titled “living in the city,’ IBA fostered midscale housing in-fill in five
Berlin districts by international and German architects—Aldo Rossi, John Hejduk,
Charles Moore, Peter Eisenman, Rob Krier, Oswald Mathias Ungers, and others.
Nonhousing projects included James Stirling’s Berlin Science Center (1984-87) and,
consistent with Berlin’s traditional interest in technological architecture, Gustav Peichl’s
Phosphate Elimination Plant (1981-85). The results, both sober and meretricious,
succeeded in keeping the divided city in the architectural spotlight, even as its
schizophrenic cachet aged. Critical reconstruction touched the East, too, in the historicist
re-creation of the Nikolai Quarter (also celebrating the anniversary). The West snubbed
this as kitsch.

The Wall and East Germany’s collapse in 1989 unleashed startling development
pressures. Construction cranes laced the sky, as the surreal transmogrification from
ideological battle-ground to world corporate and financial center began. Traffic, never an
issue in circumscribed West Berlin, exploded overnight. The Wall, instantaneously a
commodity, was chipped to bits, its best graffiti-carrying segments sold to museums
(only a few lengths remained in situ, with one inaugurated as a Wall Memorial in 1998).
Public planning commenced only following German reunification and the election of a
unified Berlin city council in late 1990. Berlin’s close victory in the 1991 vote to move


the federal seat from Bonn opened the need for a wholly reconfigured capital, a task
exceeding even Francois Mitterrand’s revitalization of Paris during the 1980s. A plethora
of raucous competitions followed.

Potsdamerplatz, lying across the Wall’s wound (between the East’s old kernel and the
West’s Kulturforum), developed first, with Sony, Daimler Benz, and others grabbing turf.
The city launched a competition to reassert control. The results prefigured a duality that
recurred throughout the 1990s: a choice between exuberant narcissism and the “sturdy
stuff’ of old Prussia. A desire to celebrate Berlin’s 20th-century ethos of diversity,
discontinuity, and rupture clashed with a desire to return to (an imagined) 1 8th-century
historical normalcy through critical reconstruction. Selected was Hilmer and Sattler’s
restatement of blocky, continuous urbanism (though this came too late to tame Helmut
Jahn’s gesticulating Sony complex). More conservatism would follow. Hans Stimmann,
Berlin’s new building commissioner, felt that Berlin was destroyed as much by postwar
planners as by Allied bombs. Height limitations (22-meter facades), masonry stipulations,
and requirements for housing were imposed. Stimman’s ideals were attacked as a “New
Teutonia.”

Berlin’s affinity for demolition continued into the post-Wall era. East Germany’s
Foreign Ministry was razed (1995), purportedly to make way for the improbable
rebuilding of Schinkel’s Bauakademie. A scaffold and canvas mock-up of the StadtschloB
(1993) seriously threatened the Communist “Palace of the Republic.” Economic realities
alone forced government re-use of a number of threatened Nazi office structures.

The 1992 Spreebogen competition for Germany’s new federal zone attracted 835
entries from 44 countries (but few from Eastern architects; new Berlin began on Western
terms). The site, adjoining the Reichstag, passed over the positional ghost of Speer’s
north/south axis. Given this “counterprecedent,” an east/west axial composition was
purposefully selected. This, by Axel Schultes, symbolically bridged the divided city’s
halves, giving attention to reestablishing the district’s interrupted tissue. Schultes also
won the competition for a new Federal Chancellery (1994). Both of Schultes’s schemes
assumed blocky forms. England’s Sir Norman Foster prevailed in the Reichstag
renovation competition, providing a new high-tech dome after controversy prevented his
winning proposal’s immense, tented canopy (1994-2000). A squat, elliptical doughnut
scheme by Gruber and Kleine-Kraneburg won the Presidential Office competition (1994).

As Balfour (1995) reported, disappointment grew with each announcement. Faced
with an opportunity that actually justifies the word “millennial,” Berlin’s almost complete
reliance on “sturdy stuff’ deflates imagination. A signal exception is Daniel Libeskind’s
Jewish Museum addition to the Berlin Museum (1993-96). Harrowed with history yet
never witnessed before, this work, like Eiermannn’s Memorial Church, is an expression
of 20th-century architecture’s potential to speak of a future that mournfully roots but
never enslaves itself to the past. This should be new/old Berlin—a place of reciprocal
tension.

RANDALL OTT
Behrens, Peter (Germany); Einstein Tower, Potsdam, Germany;
Expressionism; Germany; Gropius, Walter (Germany); Mendelsohn, Erich

(Germany, United States); Meyer, Hannes (Germany); Mies van der Rohe,

Ludwig (Germany); Scharoun, Hans (Germany); Taut, Bruno (Germany);
Wagner, Otto (Austria)

Further Reading

Aman, Anders, Roger and Kerstin Tanner translator, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press; Architectural History Foundation, 1992
Baker, Frederick, “The Berlin Wall: Production, Preservation, and Consumption of a
Twentieth-Century Monument,” 67, 257 (1993)
Balfour, Alan, New York: Rizzoli, 1990
Balfour, Alan (editor), London: Academy Editions, 1995
Buddenseig, Tilmann (editor), Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag, 1987

Buddenseig, Tilmann, Henning Rogge, et al., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press, 1984
Helmer, Stephen D., Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press, 1985
Kleihues, Josef P., and Heinrich Klotz (editors), New York: Rizzoli, 1987
Kleihues, Josef Paul, and Christina Rathgeber (editors), New York: Rizzoli,
1993
Krier, Leon, Brussels: Archives d’ Architecture Moderne, Editions, 1985
Ladd, Brian, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997
Lane, Barbara Miller, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1968;
reprint 1985
Taylor, Robert R., Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974
Wiedenhoeft, Ronald V., Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press, 1985
Wise, Michael Z., New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998

BERLIN PHILHARMONIC CONCERT
HALL

Designed by Hans Scharoun; completed 1963 Berlin, Germany

In 1956 Hans Scharoun (1893-1972) won an invited competition of 12 architects to
design a home for Germany’s premier orchestra. Now considered to be one of Scharoun’s
crowning achievements, the Berlin Philharmonic Concert Hall (1963) is outstanding both
for its auditorium design and for its dynamic spatial experiences. The site in Berlin
originally chosen for the competition was on the Bundesallee adjacent to a 19th-century
school, the Joachimsthaler. Scharoun’s design used the Philharmonic building to create a
public square on axis with Stiiler’s Matthai Church. In 1959, however, the Berlin Senate
changed the site to the Tiergarten in anticipation of the development of a new cultural
center for the city of Berlin, an attempt to revitalize an area that had been devastated in
the war. The basic form and concept of Scharoun’s design remained the same, but he
adjusted the configuration of the foyer and ancillary spaces to accommodate the new site.

Scharoun completed the adaptations and overseeing of the construction in conjunction
with the architect Werner Weber. Work proceeded rapidly, and within three years of the
laying of the foundation stone in 1960, the auditorium opened on 15 October 1963 with a
concert directed by Herbert von Karajan, a supporter of Scharoun in the early phases of
the competition.

At the time of its completion, both the critics and the public lauded the auditorium
design for its innovation, but they derided the exterior form, likening its sweeping roofs
to a circus tent. Originally left as rough-finished concrete and painted a yellow ochre
color reminiscent of many of the historic buildings in Berlin, the exterior of the
auditorium was faced in the 1980s with golden anodized aluminum panels, further
accentuating the central form. In a striking contrast to the dominance of the central
auditorium is the three-story administrative wing, which angles away from the auditorium
as a painted white rectangular mass.

Particularly significant, however, is the fact that Scharoun, who considered the
creation of interior and exterior spaces of equal importance, used the foyer as a mediating
space so that both site and auditorium requirements could be accommodated. The foyer
reaches out into the site, drawing the visitor into the entry, where, once inside, he or she
confronts a dynamic, fluid space. Angled walls break up the edges of the foyer, blurring
the boundaries between one area and another. Located near the entry are amenities, such
as ticket booths and coat rooms, which are split between the multiple levels. Within the
foyer, dramatic stairs rise seemingly at random but are actually artfully controlled and
successfully accommodate the large number of people attending the performances. Using
the placement of the stairs to guide circulation, Scharoun creates a dynamic
nonhierarchical yet elegant spatial experience that removes the visitor psychologically
from the world outside.

Scharoun’s concern for the relationship of the individual to the community carried
over into his design of the Philharmonic. He assembled a group of artists and engineers
whose work underscores his theories. Erich Fritz Reuter’s slate mosaic floor patterns
guide the visitor through the foyer toward the two main stairs, which are further
highlighted by Alexander Camaro’s colored-glass windows and a sloping glass skylight.
Light, shadow, and subtle color activate the daytime experience of the foyer. In contrast,
the evening lighting is more subdued, with pendant “dandelion” lights designed by
Giinther Symmank and lit handrails along the stairs.

Exceedingly aware of the cultural and political importance of the building,
Scharoun designed an architectural experience that creates a community
through the dissolution of traditional barriers between the listeners and the
performers. Scharoun explained the generative idea for his design as
“music in the centre—this, from the very beginning, has been the guiding
principle which has shaped the new Philharmonic auditorium.” In addition
to his generative concept of the centralized performance space, Scharoun
described the auditorium metaphorically as a landscape where banks of
angled seating become “vineyards” sloping into the “valley” of the stage
and the ceiling a “skyscape” floating above. The angled groups of seating

prevent the creation of a single focal point, forcing the viewers to visually

address the other listeners, thus subduing the overall symmetry of the plan.
The auditorium is equipped with a 72-register organ built by Schuke with
Professor Michael Schneider, facilities for television production and
recording, locations throughout for small additional groups of musicians,
and the ability to lower the orchestra floor in sections to accommodate a
variety of performance types. None of the 2,218 seats, however, is more
than 100 feet away from the stage, and only 270 seats are located

Berlin Philharmonic Concert Hall,
designed by Hans Scharoun (1963)

© Randall Ott

behind the orchestra. The overall impression in the auditorium remains one of intimacy.

The acoustical design of the auditorium was one of Scharoun’s primary concerns.
Through his work with the engineer Lothar Cremer, they achieved reverberation times in
the auditorium ranging between 2 and 2.4 seconds. A triple-shell roof system and double-
wall design buffer the auditorium from outside noise, and the limestone walls
surrounding the orchestra act as reflectors.

Currently, adjacent to the Philharmonic Concert Hall is the Chamber Music Hall
(1978). Although the initial sketch was by Scharoun, Edgar Wisniewski completed the
hall after Scharoun’s death. Unfortunately, Scharoun’s original ideas regarding the siting
of the Philharmonic were never completed. Later, in conjunction with his design of the
State Library (1967-78), Scharoun produced another site design that included the
Philharmonic site. However, this was never completed either, and there remains a
disjointed quality to the site.

The recent resurgence of interest in Scharoun’s work in general and the Philharmonic
Concert Hall in particular indicates the influence of his work beyond the labels of
German Expressionist or organic architecture, an interest gained from his friend Hugo
Haring. Scharoun’s prioritization of spatial experiences and expressive designs has
influenced many later 20th-century architects. The Berlin Philharmonic Concert Hall
remains one of the most unique architectural spatial experiences, as well as one of the
most successful concert halls built to date, and is a flourishing cultural addition to the city
of Berlin.

KATHERINE WHEELER BORUM

Acoustics; Expressionism; Scharoun, Hans (Germany)

Further Reading

Birkle, J.Christoph, Frankfurt: Campus, 1986; as Zurich: Artemis, 1993
Conrads, Ulrich, Berlin: Lettner-Verlag, 1964
Frampton, Kenneth, “Genesis of the Philharmonic,’ 35 (March 1965)
Futagawa, Yukio, and Hiroshi Sasaki (editors), Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita Tokyo, 1973;
revised edition, 1976
Janofske, Eckhard, “Meaning from Contrast: Scharoun’s Philharmonic in Berlin,” 3
(March 1982)
Jones, Peter Blundell, London: Gordon Frasier Gallery, 1978
Jones, Peter Blundell, “Hans Scharoun: An Introduction,” 48, no. 7 (1978)
Jones, Peter Blundell, “Organic versus Classic,” 10, no. 10 (1978)
Jones, Peter Blundell, “From the Neoclassical Axis to Aperspective Space,” 183
(March 1988)
Jones, Peter Blundell, London: Phaidon, 1995
Lanier, R.S., “Acoustics in-the-Round at the Berlin Philharmonic,” 120 (May 1964)
Pehnt, Wolfgang, Stuttgart, Germany: Hatje, 1973; 3rd edition, Ostflldern-Ruit:
Hatje, 1998;as | London: Thames and Hudson, and New York: Praeger, 1973
“The Philharmonic, West Berlin,” 35 (March 1965)
Posener, Julius, “Philharmonic Concert-Hall, Berlin,” 135 (May 1964)
Segal, Walter, “Scharoun,” 153 (February 1973)

BERLIN WALL, BERLIN 1961-89

The Berlin Wall stood in Berlin, Germany, for 28 years, 2 months, and 26 days.
However, it was not just any wall—it was Wall: politically, a symbol of the post-World
War II Cold War world order; architecturally, an example of the power of the most basic
building block of architecture; and artistically, a giant 166-kilometer-long blank canvas.
After the defeat of the Third Reich in 1945, both Germany and its capital, Berlin, were
partitioned into four zones, each under the administration of one of the Allies: Great

Britain, France, the United States, and the USSR. The partition of Germany was done so
along existing provincial boundaries. The partition of Berlin, which was located in the
middle of the Soviet sector, was done so in terms of postal codes.

In 1949 the French-, British-, and American-controlled sectors were merged to form
the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), with Bonn as its capital. In that same year, the
Soviet-controlled eastern quarter of Germany became the German Democratic Republic
(GDR), with (East) Berlin as its capital. Although the USSR proclaimed the sovereignty
of the GDR in 1954, East Germany effectively was an internally run satellite of the
USSR.

Between the years 1949 and 1961, it is estimated that approximately three million
people, or roughly one-sixth of the population, fled from the GDR to the West. This
exodus occurred both along the 1,400-kilometer border with the FRG and from East to
West Berlin. Because the refugees were from all professions and mostly under the age of
25, the GDR soon faced a social and economic crisis, especially in terms of the loss of
trained and specialist personnel.

To stop this flow of refugees, armed units of the GDR began to seal off the open
border between East and West Berlin in the early morning of 13 August 1961. The border
between the GDR and the FRG was also sealed, and West Berlin became, in effect, an
island in the middle of the GDR. The justification for these fortifications was clear in the
GDR’s name for them—‘the antifascist protective barrier”—suggesting the prevention of
the West from coming in, not the prevention of the East from going out.

At first the Berlin Wall was merely a hastily constructed barbed-wire fence with
armed guards. During the remainder of 1961, these initial fortifications rapidly grew
more sophisticated. In front of the Brandenburg Gate, soldiers constructed a seven-foot-
high (2.1 meters), six-foot-deep (1.8 meters) tankproof bar rier with steel posts and
prefabricated concrete slabs laid flat and held with mortar. Elsewhere in Berlin, concrete
slabs were laid vertically and then topped off with square concrete blocks and barbed
wire.

On the eastern side of the Wall, the GDR then slowly began to construct a no-man’s
land. First, a second wall was built approximately one city block (100 meters) into East
Berlin. This system was perfected with lookout towers, searchlights, tank traps, dog runs,
trip wires, alarmed fences, and ditches in between the two walls. Then the above-ground
division was doubled underground as Berlin’s subway lines were severed and terminated
at the border. Eventually, all roads, train lines, canals, and other transportation routes in
and out of West Berlin were either severed or controlled by GDR border police.

In some areas of Berlin, the East-West border ran right down the middle of a street,
thanks to the previously mentioned decision to use postal codes as the division line. In
these locations, the buildings on the East were evacuated and their openings bricked up,
effectively making the buildings themselves the Berlin Wall. Eventually, these buildings
and also the early versions of the Wall were demolished and replaced with the
superefficient “fourth generation,” or 1979 version, which proved to be the most famous.
It consisted of four-foot-wide (1.2 meters) prefabricated concrete L-shaped panels nearly
12 feet (3.6 meters) high, laid side-by-side in mortar and topped with a round concrete
tube. Each panel weighed 2.6 tons and had to be installed with a crane.

This last version of the Berlin Wall is the one that became famous for its graffiti. Soon
after the 1979 version was built, all sorts of comments, slogans, stories, constructions,


figures, and grotesque fantasies began to be written, stenciled, and painted onto it. Every
year, the GDR border guards would dutifully paint over these scribbles in a futile attempt
to draw attention away from them, and every year the Wall would fill right back up with
its multicolored messages.

The Wall soon became no longer a thorn in the side of West Berlin but rather an asset,
almost a tourist attraction. Tourists from around the world no longer came to West Berlin
to take in an opera or to visit a museum but rather to marvel at this three-dimensional
expression of an arbitrary line on the map. The American artist Keith Haring painted a
vast stretch near “Checkpoint Charlie” in 1986 and held a press conference afterward.
After that point, the Wall was considered art.

The beginnings of the fall of the Berlin Wall can be traced to the 1985 election of
Mikhail Gorbachev as general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
Gorbachev’s policies, which allowed the satellite nations of Eastern Europe to determine
their own affairs, brought about demands in those countries for more freedom. In May
1989 the Hungarian government opened its border with Austria, thereby lifting
Churchill’s famous “iron curtain” and allowing GDR citizens to travel to the West via
Hungary. On 9 November 1989 the GDR announced on the radio that all citizens were
free to travel wherever they wanted. This decree effectively rendered the Berlin Wall
useless.

Within one year, the Berlin Wall was practically destroyed by both angry East
Germans and hungry souvenir hunters. Other parts were dismantled and recycled for road
construction. On 3 October 1990 East and West Germany were officially unified into a
single Federal Republic of Germany. In 1995 one watchtower and four stretches of the
remaining Berlin Wall totaling 1.71 kilometers were placed under protection and
designated as historical monuments. The Wall thus officially became history.

CHRISTOPHER WILSON
Berlin, Germany; Fascist Architecture
Further Reading
Mobius, Peter, and Helmut Trotnow, (Walls Are Not Built Forever: On the

History of the Berlin Wall), Frankfurt: Propylaen, 1990
Read, Anthony, and David Fisher, | London: Hutchinson, and New York: Norton, 1994
Schiirer, Ernst, Manfred Keune, and Philip Jenkins (editors), New York: Peter
Lang, 1996
Waldenburg, Hermann, London: Thames and Hudson, 1990

BEST PRODUCTS SHOWROOM

Designed by SITE; completed 1975 Houston, Texas

The Best Products building located in Houston, Texas, also known as the
“indeterminate facade,” was built in 1975 as a showroom by the architectural firm SITE
for the Best Products retail chain. The building is known mainly for its idiosyncratic
facade, which wraps a 65,000-square-foot, commercial-formula building with a high
brick wall that appears to be in the act of collapsing. The extended cornice is given an
irregular profile as though it were coming apart, and atop the entrance a massive pile of
bricks tumbles through a gap, resting precariously on a thin metal canopy. The building
presents a startling image when viewed within its suburban context, a strip center located
between Almeda Mall Shopping Center and a residential neighborhood along the Gulf
Freeway. Visitors’ reactions to the building have ranged from amusement to concerns for
the safety of the occupants; a common conjecture soon after the building opened was that
it was damaged by a Gulf coast hurricane or an earthquake. The apocalyptic vision was,
of course, apocryphal; inside the building it was business as usual.

The Houston showroom is one of several unusual designs that SITE produced for the

Richmond, Virginia-based company, each of them involving an eye-catching
embellishment of the facade. The commissions were in no small measure owing to the
patronage of the late Sidney Lewis, then president of Best, who was an avid collector of
contemporary art. Lewis was seeking ways to incorporate art into his showrooms to
distinguish them from the conformity of standard shopping-strip architecture. In an
earlier commission in 1972, shortly after the formation of the SITE group, the designers
enlivened a Best Products showroom in Richmond, Virginia, with the Peeling Front, a
facade that was molded in epoxy to create the appearance that the facing brick was
peeling away from the building’s backing materials. However, of all the SITE designs,
the Houston showroom was the one that was most photographed and that received the
most popular and critical attention.
SITE was organized in 1970 as a collaboration between Alison Skye, who was trained
as an art historian; Michelle Stone, a photographer and sociologist; and James Wines, a
sculptor. The confluence of their various disciplinary points of view resulted in designs
that rejected conventional architectural formulas for new inspirations found in
contemporary art (particularly the work of American Pop artists of the 1960s, such as
Claes Oldenburg), social commentary, and popular culture.

Wines, who became the chief spokesman for the group, described SITE’s work as
being about “de-architecture,” which he defined as a condition of reversing or removing
some quality or ingredient from architecture in order to destabilize it. It was a means of
defining an attitude or of changing standard reactions to the urban context, including the
ubiquitous strip centers that were burgeoning along America’s highways. In the Best
showrooms, they attacked the most banal, contemporary building type, the commercial
box, by subverting the traditional relationships between form, function, and economy. In
its place they foregrounded the often ambiguous relationship between the building’s


contents and the external influences of a more inclusive social and cultural context. The
SITE designs made the showroom buildings into memorable landmarks—no small feat
among the visual complexities and commercial excesses of the suburban strip. As
marketing strategies, their success could be measured in increased sales revenues for the
Best Company.

Curiously, the buildings also became the focus of intense architectural commentary,
perhaps because they distilled many of the interests of the Postmodernists—for example,
the idea of the decorated shed advanced by architect Robert Venturi—and pushed them
almost to the point of parody. Extensive critical review and coverage of the Houston
showroom in both the professional and the popular press included sympathetic reviews
by Gerald Allen (1977) and Bruno Zevi (1980), the latter of whose commentary was
titled “The Poetics of the Unfinished.” Opposite opinions were registered by architects
Lebbeus Woods, who considered the building to be little more than a “one-liner” without
sustaining power, and Léon Krier, who called it tragic and a setback for architecture.

The extraordinary amount of attention that was paid to the building owed partly to
Wines’s own polemical writings and interviews in which he described SITE’s mission as
a confrontation with the tenets of modern architecture, particularly the orthodoxies of
formal functionalism (that is, International Style). In the Houston design, with its
wholeness shattered by the appearance of chaos, the commentary went further,
constructing a deliberate subversion of the glossy conformity that expressed the
economic and building boom in the state of Texas. By liberating the facade and making it
a plaything of the imagination, the Best Showroom signaled the arrival of wit, parody,
and surreal figuration in architecture. These inversions on the standard architectural
formulas were similar to the fascinations of the avant-garde artists beginning with Marcel
Duchamp in the early 20th century, who worked to blur conventional categories and
definitions of art.

The Best Showroom has been described as both a mock ruin and a vision of
incompleteness or indeterminacy, Wines himself staunchly defending the latter
interpretation. As a constructed ruin, it was never romantic or reflective, as was the case
with many of the mock ruins or follies from history. Instead, it was intended to call
attention to itself by creating an architectural puzzle in which the viewer is invited to fill
in the missing pieces. As a cultural icon, it introduced to the strip the ambiguous sign
whose meaning had little relationship either to the contents or to the usual patterns of
signification that were characteristic of strip architecture. Wines used the freedom of this
new formulation to pursue a fusion of art and architecture, although in this case whatever
architecture there was in the design was largely devoured by the effusiveness of imagery
that is, after all, decoration. Because SITE never interfered with the formula for the
interior layouts of the showrooms, the projects portrayed a fundamental schism between
form and content—inside and out—that was a characteristic feature of much of the work
of the Postmodern architects.

Best Products Showroom, Houston,
Texas, designed by SITE (1976)

© G.E.Kidder Smith/CORBIS

Over the years, the building has settled into the landscape as an unselected period
piece of popular, architectural culture from another era. Rather than defining a direction
for architecture, its main accomplishment was to exhibit an ambitious and audacious,
aberrant behavior. The Best Products company declared bankruptcy in 1991, closing its
Houston showroom in 1992. After sitting idle for several years, the building was
reoccupied as a video store and its indeterminate facade outfitted with a new, red-neon
script sign advertising the new tenants.

BRUCE WEBB
Brick; Postmodernism; Shopping Center; Venturi, Robert (United
States); Vernacular Architecture; Zevi, Bruno (Italy)

Further Reading

Balch, Barbara, and Arthur Drexler, | New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1979
Bzdak, Michael J., “Indeterminate Facade, Best Products Show Room,” in edited
by Tod J.Marder, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1985
Moore, John, “The Ruin, the Tilt, and a Gaping Hole Are Luring Customers,” (27
February 1979)

Papademetriou, Peter, “The Joke Is Out of Site,” 57 (January 1967)

Site, Inc., New York: Site, 1975
Wines, James, “De-Architecturization,” 45 (July 1975)

BIRKERTS, GUNNAR 1925-

Architect, United States

Gunnar Birkerts is the leading American exponent of organic architecture in the
generation of architects that came to maturity in the 1960s. Working in the tradition of
Erich Mendelsohn, Hugo Haring, and Eero Saarinen, Birkerts received his architectural
education in Stuttgart from 1945 to 1949. During his years in Germany, he was drawn to
Scandinavian modernism rather than Bauhaus doctrine, which was still taught at the
Technische Hochschule. In 1959 he formed a partnership with Frank Straub, and since
1962 he has been practicing independently in addition to teaching, lecturing, and writing.

Birkerts’s early buildings show a rejection of the dogmas of the International Style,
and a mastery of site problems that is unusual in any architect, young or old. Within their
urban context, his buildings respond to other works of architecture and to dominant
geographic features. Moreover, Birkerts playfully utilizes the metaphorical qualities of
architecture within the design process.

The nature of his expressive design process has allowed Birkerts to adapt to some
unusual clients and remarkable problems. He designed the new Federal Reserve Bank in
Minneapolis under the leadership of bank president Hugh Galusha in 1973; at first glance
it appears to be a monolithic Brutalist facade. Its most striking feature is a curving,
catenary arch that frees up a great deal of space below ground for high-security work, and
allows for office space above.

In 1984 Birkerts built the Domino’s Pizza World Headquarters in Ann Arbor, a
complex of buildings that included corporate headquarters, warehouses, laboratories, and
public spaces. Birkerts designed the buildings as a series of long, low, broad-eaved
structures that appear to shoot across the flat site as if on railroad tracks. Birkerts
borrowed elements of Frank Lloyd Wright’s designs (primarily the manner in which
buildings relate to the natural setting) in a continuation of the organic tradition of
architecture in the United States.

Birkerts’ 1981 library addition to the Law School at the University of Michigan in
Ann Arbor precisely melds with the existing buildings in the quad, including the neo-
Gothic Legal Research building and Hutchins Hall, which are relatively recent
adaptations of King’s College Chapel in Cambridge, England. In order to preserve the
integrity of the quadrangle, the architect’s solution was to put the library addition
underground. Thus, the sidewalk on the east end of the quadrangle runs along the roof of
the Law Library. The building’s exterior wall forms a limestone V-shaped moat along the
outside of the structure, abutting a trough of glass plate windows, providing a major
source of day-light. For Birkerts, light is as much a tangible material as it was to Alvar
Aalto, whose aesthetic the Ann Arbor library recalls.

Birkerts’s design process draws heavily upon intuition. A student of
psychology, Birkerts initially relies on rough sketches that look like
doodles. As a project is refined, these sketches are expanded into drawings
and models that explore functioning spaces and orientation. The architect
terms his process “organic synthesis” and claims that, as he responds to

space needs, he


Corning Museum of Glass
(renovation), Corning, New York,
designed by Gunnar Birkerts (1980)

© Balthazar Koram

uses a free form polygonal geometry that he can adapt at will. It allows him to define
space without compromising functional or aesthetic considerations.

His 1980 renovation and remodeling of the Corning Museum of Glass in Corning,
New York, is a masterful synthesis of organics and plastic form that metaphorically
evokes the material of glass itself. The building’s exterior surface undulates like liquid
glass in the furnace; this effect is carefully tempered by hard right angles that represent
glass in its solid state. To create an effect of brilliant illumination and visual clarity,
Birkerts designed periscope windows, with slanting mirrors to deflect direct sunlight
without blocking the view.

More recently, Birkerts has begun two buildings in his native country that are still
under construction (as of 2003): the Latvian National Library at Riga, and Museum of the
Occupation of Latvia. The former received the 2000 Annual American Architecture Prize
of the Chicago Museum of Architecture and Design. With a spectacular site near the
Daugava River in the country’s capital city, the Latvian National Library takes the form
of a crystal mountain emerging from dark waters, and contains at its upper level, the
treasures of Latvian literary history. Birkerts sees his Latvian buildings as the opportunity
to create grand national symbols that express the country’s layered history, character, and
freedom.

LEONARD K.EATON
Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Bauhaus; International Style; Saarinen, Eero
(Finland); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States); Yam as aki, Minoru

(United States)

Biography

Born in Riga, Latvia, 17 January 1925; immigrated to the United States 1949; naturalized
1954. Attended the Technische Hochschule, Stuttgart 1945-49; degree in architecture and
engineering 1949. Married Sylvia Zvirbulis 1950:3 children. Designer, office of
Lawrence B.Perkins and Will, Chicago 1950-51; designer, offices of Eero Saarinen and
Associates, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan 1951—54; chief designer, Minoru Yamasaki and
Associates, Birmingham, Michigan 1955-59. Principal, Birkerts and Straub, Birmingham
1959-62; president, Gunnar Birkerts and Associates, Birmingham from 1962. Assistant
professor, 1961, associate professor, 1963-69, professor of architecture, 1969-90,
professor emeritus, from 1990, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; architect in
residence, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 1982; T.S.Monaghan professor,
University of Oklahoma 1990. Fellow, American Institute of Architects; fellow, Latvian
Architects Association; fellow, Graham Foundation.

Selected Works

Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 1973

Corning Museum of Glass (renovation), Corning, New York, 1980

Allan and Alene Smith Addition, Law School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
1981

Domino’s Pizza World Headquarters, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1984

American Embassy, Caracas, Venezuela, 1987

Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art and Design, Kansas City, Missouri, 1991

Geisel Library Underground Addition, University of California, San Diego (with
Carrier Johnson), 1993

Church of the Servant, Kentwood, Michigan, 1994

Duke University Law School Addition, Durham, North Carolina, 1995

Latvian National Library, Riga, 1989-2000

Museum of the Occupation of Latvia, Riga, 2001-

Selected Publications

1974
1985
1994

Further Reading

The most comprehensive treatment of Birkerts is Kaiser 1989, with a respectful but not
overly laudatory text. The article in is the most recent commentary on the Latvian
National Library in Riga and contains a brief interview with the architect. A profile and
extracts from an interview with Birkerts in which the author assesses the last ten years of

his practice is found in Kaiser 1999. Birkerts himself has provided an excellent
commentary on his projects and executed buildings in Marlin, which includes superb
photographs. Birkerts has given a collection of his drawings and photographs of his work
to the Bentley Historical Library at the University of Michigan.

“Gunnar Birkerts and Kevin Rochi: The Return of the Prodigal Sons to Latvia and

Ireland,” 80 (October 1999)
Kaiser, Kay, Washington, D.C.: American Institute of Architects Press, 1989
Kaiser, Kay, “Gunnar Birkerts,” 36 (1999)
Marlin, William, edited and photographed by Yukio Futagawa, Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita,
1982

BLOMSTEDT, AULIS 1906-79

Architect, Finland

Although the international perspective of architectural developments in Finland
centered on the work of Alvar Aalto in the quarter-century following World War II,
Finnish architecture during this time was very much more than Aalto. This period is often
viewed, again from an international perspective, as the quiet, golden age of the century,
with numerous works realized in a material palette relying on brick and wood. Within
Finland, while Aalto went his own way, the majority of Finnish architects continued to
practice an evolved form of modernism influenced by Mies van der Rohe, among others.
This work is characterized by its direct approach in the use of reinforced concrete and
steel along with brick and wood, coupled with rational building planning and
organizational techniques. Less romantic in conception than Aalto’s work, these
buildings expanded the rationalist aspect of modernism while incorporating more
expressive spatial explorations with richer material vocabularies.

A major intellectual and creative force in this period—and one often not recognized
internationally—was Aulis Blomstedt. Although he did not design many buildings,
Blomstedt had a strong influence on Finnish architecture and is often viewed as the
significant counterpoint to Aalto. More than any of his contemporaries, Blomstedt’s
important influence can be seen both in his work as well as in his theoretical writings and
presentations. Without question, he was the foremost theoretician in Finnish architecture
during the postwar period. Though his work and writings, he aimed to develop an
objective theory of architecture that could be verified through practice, with simplicity,
austerity, and abstraction becoming the essentials in his designs. His terraced Ketju
housing complex in Tapiola (1954) and Worker’s Institute Addition in Helsinki (1959)
are essays indicating his rigorous process of thinking and doing, as are a series of abstract
graphic and installation pieces he developed for studying proportion and dimension. In
addition to practicing, Blomstedt was a professor at the Helsinki University of
Technology, and his influence is seen in the works of his students, Kristian Gullichsen,
Juhani Pallasmaa, Erkki Kairamo, and Kirmo Mikkola, among others, that were executed
since the 1970s.


Like his contemporaries, Blomstedt received a classical education in architecture at
the Helsinki Institute of Technology, and a number of his student projects are indicative
of this. The work is sympathetic with the “Nordic Classicism” found throughout
Scandinavia architecture during the 1920s. He made a study tour to Italy in 1927. By the
time of his graduation in 1930, his work embraced the transition to functionalism that had
occurred in Finland during the late 1920s: His diploma project—‘A Circus for
Helsinki”—bears witness to this change. The firms for which he worked immediately
following graduation practiced in the classical style.

During his tenure as chief architect for the Finnish Ministry of Defense, he executed
projects such as the Air Force School Hospital in Kauhava (1934) and the Aerodrome
No. 6, Staff Headquarters and Barracks buildings in Imatra (1936), among others. These
works demonstrate a modesty and practicality, yet are also good examples of
functionalist design.

In 1942, following the Russo-Finnish War, The Finnish Association of Architects set
up a reconstruction office to address the rebuilding issues facing Finland, as well as
relocation problems resulting from the war (120,000 homes were destroyed or abandoned
and over 400,000 citizens were resettled from territory ceded to the Soviet Union).
Blomstedt worked on the development of standardized plans and prefabricated building
designs with Viljo Revell, Kaj Englund, Aarne Hyténen, Yrjé Lindegren, Olli Péyry, and
Erkki Koiso-Kanttile. In this environment, Blomstedt laid the foundation for the postwar
debate on aesthetic principles and social applications of modular industrial systems used
for housing complexes. This work also had a powerful influence on the development of
Finnish building standards immediately after the war.

Blomstedt opened his architectural practice in 1944 and was soon engaged in
designing numerous housing complexes and dwellings, among other works, throughout
Finland. Over his entire career, Blomstedt, like a number of his contemporaries, was an
active architectural competition entrant (the architects for Finnish public buildings are
selected through an open competition process). His numerous entries always combined a
strong theoretical foundation with practical problem solving and planning techniques.

By the early 1950s, Finland was active in developing new towns in the forest areas
near existing cities. One of the most important initial projects was Tapiola, an
internationally recognized development, outside of Helsinki. In 1952 Blomstedt joined
Aame Ervi, Viljo Revell, Markus Tavio, and the town planner, Otto-I.Meurman, on the
first phase of the plan for Tapiola. Several of Blomstedt’s best housing projects were
designed for Tapiola, including the harmonious group of three chain houses and three
apartment blocks on adjacent sides of a street. With their alternating red brick and white
stucco facades, the Ketju terraced row houses have two-story living quarters linked by a
variable intermediate section that was designed as reserve space for future uses or needs.
The apartment blocks designed for the other side of the street (but were not built) would
have reinforce the streetscape, acting as a compositional foil to the row housing. Works
in Tapiola include the Finnish Artists Society terraced housing (1955), the Riistapolku
housing complex (1957-60), and the Helikko housing complex (1961-62), among many
other types of housing projects. Much of Blomstedt’s body of work resides in Tapiola.

Without question, the extension to the Helsinki Finnish Worker’s Institute is
Blomstedt’s most important work. Adding on to Gunnar Taucher’s 1927 classical work,
Blomstedt derives the dimensions of his new building from the classical proportions of


the original. This results in achieving a harmony between the new and the old through
massing and proportions in the facades. Three times the size of the older building, the
addition does not disturb the urban context of the original but is sensitively sited behind
it. Blomstedt skillfully exploits the significant level change occurring between the streets
that border the site. The new building is placed parallel to the existing one in a new
excavated courtyard space. A rock wall clad in colored concrete slabs provides an
effective boundary to the back of the court, and the new main entrance is located within
the courtyard. Further, there are painterly and architectural qualities in the addition and
its spaces that directly reference the Dutch De Stijl movement.

Blomstedt was also a theoretician, however, and from the 1940s onward, he focused
on clarifying architecture through intellectual speculations. Modular and proportional
discipline was Blomstedt’s foundation, for he sought to develop a universal system
derived from human measurements and dimensional harmony. The crystallization of his
research was “Canon 60,” a system of dimensions and proportions in which the principals
of mathematical and musical harmony were applied to building. In achieving this, he was
able to extend his classical training into contemporary architecture, continuing one of the
oldest traditions in Western architecture—using the principles of harmonic proportions—
into current practice.

Austerity and simplicity were essentials of Blomstedt’s work. But his austerity and
simplicity is not for the simple-minded, who would miss the subtle and poetic realizations
in his work. Like that of the classical and Renaissance architects before him, Blomstedt’s
architecture is an architecture for both the mind and the senses.

WILLIAM C.MILLER
Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Finland; Revell, Viljo (Finland)

Biography

Born in Jyvaskyla, Finland, 28 July 1906. His father Yrjé Blomstedt (1871-1912) and his
brother Pauli (also known as P.E. Blomstedt, 1900-35) were also architects. His wife,
Heidi Sibelius Blomstedt (1911-81), was the daughter of the renowned Finnish composer
Jean Sibelius. Graduated and qualified as an architect and, while working in a variety of
offices, also taught at the Central School of Applied Arts 1930. Chief architect for the
Finnish Ministry of Defense 1934-37; chief editor, Finnish architectural journal, 1941—
45; co-founder of the legendary theoretical periodical, 1958. Began his private practice
1944-79; Professor of Architecture at the Helsinki Technical University 1958-65;
received the Finnish State Prize in Architecture 1977. Died 21 December 1979.

Selected Works

Restaurant Valhalla, Helsinki, 1947
Villa Salonen, Espoo, 1948
Block of flats, Turku, 1951
Block of flats, Helsinki, 1952
Block of flats and “chain”-houses, Tapiola, 1954

Terrace houses with studios, Tapiola, 1955

Block of flats, Tapiola, 1956-57

Atelier Aulis Blomstedt, Tapiola, 1958

Worker’s Institute addition, Helsinki, 1959

Villa Pettersson, Helsinki, 1960

Block of flats, Tapiola, 1961

Terraced houses, Tapiola, 1962

Block of flats, Tapiola, 1965

Kulosaari Congregational Center, Helsinki, 1976
Warehouse, Espoo, 1976

Further Reading

(exhib. cat.), Helsinki, Museum of Finnish Architecture, 1976
Helander, Vilhelm, and Simo Rista, Helsinki: Kirjayhtyma Oy, 1987
Norri, Marja-Riitta, Elina Standertsjéld, and Wilfred Wang, Helsinki: Museum of
Finnish Architecture, 2000
Pallasmaa, Juhani (editor), (exhib. cat.), Helsinki: Museum of Finnish
Architecture, 1980
Pallasmaa, Juhani, “Man, Measure and Proportion: Aulis Blomstedt and the Tradition of
Pythagorean harmonies,” (1992).
Poole, Scott, New York: Rizzoli International, 1992
Quantrill, Malcolm, New York: E & FN Spon, 1995
Richards, J.M., North Pomfret, Vermont: David and Charles, 1978
Salokorpi, Asko, New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1970
Suhonen, Pekka, Helsinki: Tammi, 1967
Suhonen, Pekka, “Aulis Blomstedt,” in edited by Muriel Emanuel, New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1980
Tempel, Egon, New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1968
Vanhakoski, Erkki, “Aulis Blomstedt—Works 1926-1979,” (1992)
Wickberg, Nils Eric, | Helsinki: Werner Sénderstrém, 1959; English edition, Helsinki:
Otava, 1962

BO BARDI, LINA 1914-92

Architect, Brazil

Lina Bo Bardi was born in Rome, Italy, in 1914 and died in Sao Paolo, Brazil, in
1992. She was among the most prolific women architects of the 20th century. She was
also a noted designer of furniture, jewelry, staging and installations, as well as an
architectural writer and editor. BO Bardi emerged at an early age as strong willed and
unconventional and was one of a handful of women to study in the College of

Architecture at Rome University in the late 1930s. Her graduation project revealed her
nonconformist bent. The project was in a modern style and was at odds with the
historicism of her teachers Marcello Piacentini and Gustavo Giovannoni; it was a large-
scale maternity hospital for unwed mothers, and was an unusual choice of topic in the
family-oriented society of prewar Italy.

On graduation, Bo Bardi left for Milan and worked for the modernist architect and
designer Gio Ponti. Ponti was the director of the Triennale of Milan and of the
architecture and design magazine both major platforms for Italian modern architecture
and industrial design. At the same time, Bo Bardi, at the age of 24, opened her own one-
woman architectural office, supporting herself as an illustrator for a woman’s fashion
magazine. In 1943 when Italy went to war, at the age of 25, she accepted the position of
codirector of and was also a member of the Italian resistance. After the war, in 1946, she
founded the famous with Bruno Zevi, and married the art critic Pietro Bardi. Because
she had been a wartime supporter of Benito Mussolini, BO Bardi would have had a
difficult professional life in Italy. Hence, the couple left for Brazil in 1947, and jointly
founded the celebrated art magazine Bo Bardi, then 29, again opened an architectural
firm, and remained in active practice until the end of her life.

Bo Bardi’s architecture is characterized by its often-daring, concrete
construction engineered in pursuit of Miesian-inspired universal spaces.
The Glass House (1951), which she designed for herself and Bardi just
outside Sado Paolo, juts out from the top of a steeply inclined site and is
screened by the surrounding tropical forest. It is an early example of the
use of reinforced concrete and glass for a domestic building. Despite its
formidable weight, it achieves an effect of airy lightness using just seven
slender columns that support the structure. Her scheme for the Taba
Guaianases Building, commissioned for the media conglomerate Diarios
Associados in Sao Paolo (1951, never completed), represented yet another
technical feat. The main issue in the scheme was technical: how to place a
building of 1,500 apartments on top of a large theater with 1,500 seats,
remaining free of columns. She collaborated on the structural engineering
with the famed Italian engineer Pier Luigi Nervi. One of her most famous
buildings, the Museum of Sao Paulo (1957-68), is a 70-meter-long glazed
structure, suspended from two prestressed longitudinal concrete beams on
the roof, resting on four pillars with a clear span under it. The exhibition
hall thus created is an immense universal space, unencumbered by
structural elements; the immense resulting space under the building
(named the Belvedere because of the view it affords over SA0 Paolo)
became one of the most popular public places in the city. With its use of
concrete construction and search for universal space, it recalls her
uncompleted Museum on the Seashore (1951) in Sado Paolo. Bé Bardi’s
second most famous project, the Pompéia Factory (1977) in Sao Paolo,


converted an abandoned steeldrum factory into a cultural and recreational
center. She qualified this low-cost project as Arquitetura Povera, inspired
by the art movement in Italy during the 1960s, called Arte Povera
(literally, poor art). Located in a 1 9th-century industrial complex, it

Sao Paulo Museum of Art, designed by
Lina Bo Bardi (1957-68)

© Eduardo Costa

exploits rather than rejects the gritty realism of the site. The two concrete high-rise
structures that she added to the complex are reminiscent of silos, bunkers, or containers,
with a series of seven prestressed-concrete walkways linking them. It contains a
swimming pool, gymnasium, studios for arts and crafts, a dance hall, and a theater for
1,200 spectators, a library, a restaurant, and exhibition halls.

Bo Bardi also built or designed many small domestic buildings in a critical regionalist
spirit, incorporating tropical vegetation into the concrete construction in novel ways: her
Chame-Chame House (1958) in Bahia preserves a Jaca tree at the center of the design
and, as in her home for Valeria P.Cirell (1958) in Sio Paolo, combines stones, ceramic
chips, and plants in the wall slabs creating vertical garden walls. She was also involved in
many renovation projects: Solar do Unhao (1963) in Bahia, the Historical Center of Bahia
(1986), the House of Benin (1987) in Bahia, and Misericordia Slope (1987) in Bahia.
Moreover, she designed furniture; the most famous example is a classic of postwar
furniture design, a chair called “Bardi’s Bowl” (1951). Much like her early buildings, it is
an exercise in structural thinking. In the form of a mobile hemispherical bowl, it rests on
a light steel structure made up of a circular ring supported on four thin legs.

Bo Bardi’s last project was for the conversion of the old Palace of Industries of Sio
Paolo into the new City Hall (1992).

LIANE LEFAIVRE
Sao Paulo, Brazil; Zevi, Bruno (Italy)

Biography

Born in Rome, 5 December 1914. Graduated from the School of Architecture, University
of Rome 1940. Married Pietro Maria Bardi 1942. Worked in the studio of Gio Ponti,
Milan 1941-43; editor, magazine, Milan 1941-43; emigrated to Brazil 1947; naturalized
1952. Assisted with the interior design of the Museu de Arte de Sao Paulo, Brazil 1947;
director, Estadio de Arte Palma, Sado Paulo, from 1947; editor, magazine, Sao Paulo
1949-53; with husband and architect Giancarlo Palanti, founded the Studio de Arte
Palma, Sao Paulo. Organized the first industrial design course in Brazil 1948-51;
professor, University of Sao Paulo 1954-55. Died in Sao Paulo, 29 March 1992.

Selected Works

Casa de Vidrio, Sdo Paulo, Brazil, 1951
Taba Guaianases (incomplete), Séo Paulo, 1951
Museum on the Seashore (incomplete), Sao Paulo, 1951
Chame-Chame House, Bahia, Brazil, 1958
Cyrel Czerna House, Sao Paulo, 1958
Solar do Unhao (restoration), Museum of Popular Art, Salvador, Bahia, 1963
Sao Paulo Museum of Art, So Paulo, 1968
Leisure Center, SESC Fabrica Pompéia, Sao Paulo, 1977
Historical Center (restoration), Bahia, 1986
Benin House and Restaurant, Salvador, Bahia, 1987
Housing Development, Ladeira de Misericérdia, Salvador, Bahia, 1987
Palace of Industries (conversion), Sao Paulo, 1992

Selected Publications

“Terapia Intensiva, Casa do Benin,” (June/ July 1988)
“Registro de Uma Idéia, Centro Cultural de Belem,” | (October/November 1988)
“Lina Bo Bardi” (with others), (May 1991)
“Uma aula de Arquiteturas,” (January/February 1992)

Further Reading
Bo Bardi, Lina, edited by Marcelo Carvalho Ferraz, S40 Paulo: Empresa das Artes,

1993; 2nd edition, Sado Paulo: Instituto Lina Bé e P.M. Bardi, 1996
Bruand, Yves, Paris: Université de Paris IV, 1971

BOFILL, RICARDO 1939-

Architect, Spain

Ricardo Bofill is one of Europe’s most prolific and provocative exponents of
Postmodernism in architecture.

In 1975 French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing described Bofill as the “world’s
greatest architect” for his award-winning design for Les Halles in Paris. In the following
decade, a series of international exhibitions and monographs confirmed his position at the
forefront of the modern classical revival. However, despite being celebrated for the
manner in which he has rejuvenated the classical and baroque traditions in architecture, it
is also an appreciation of geometry and the interrelation among social, spatial, and
technical systems that define his work.

Bofill was born in Barcelona in 1939, and between 1955 and 1960 he studied at the
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura in Barcelona and the Université de Genéve in
Switzerland. In 1960 he founded the multidisciplinary team (Architecture Workshop),
and since that time he has worked with them in close collaboration on all his designs.
Bofill and the Taller have been based in Barcelona and Sant Just Desvern in Spain since
that period, but they have also opened offices in Paris, Algeria, and New York.

Bofill describes both his childhood in Catalonia and his travels with his family as
being strong influences on his architectural career. It was while growing up in Barcelona
that he developed a great fascination for the architecture of Antoni Gaudi (1852-1926)
and for traditional Catalan craftsmanship. During his later travels throughout Western
Europe and North Africa, he also cultivated an interest in the manner in which spaces
shape social interaction. All of these themes suffuse his early architectural works,
including the Plaza San Gregorio Apartment Building (1965) and the Nicaragua
Apartment Building (1965) in Barcelona, as well as the Barrio Gaudi (1968) in Reus. All
three of the buildings are constructed of simple industrial materials that are applied in
traditional ways, and all feature elaborate, variegated roofscapes and richly textured and
decorated facades.

Bofill’s work first came to international prominence in the early 1970s, when the
produced a series of brightly colored, and enigmatically titled buildings throughout
Spain. All these projects, including Xanadu (1967) on the bay of Sitges, Walden-7 (1975)
in Sant Just Desvern, and Kafka’s Castle (1968) and Red Wall (1972), both in Alicante,
display a similar theme; they share a preoccupation with the manner in which geometric
systems can generate forms that are complex yet conducive to social interaction. Kafka’s
Castle is a resort, and is generated from a series of equations that govern the siting and
distribution of cubic rooms and castellated balconies. One equation generates the number
of room capsules that plug into the stair towers, and another determines the height of each
spiral progression around the stair. Rather than resulting in a bland or repetitive building,
the overlaying of these simple geometric rules produces a rich and evocative
environment. In Walden-7, a monumental 17-story apartment complex, this same method
is used to accommodate different-sized groups of people in cellular spaces. Both of these
flexible-use living areas are connected by vast atriums, upper-level bridges, and roof
gardens. Bofill describes these early works as being an intuitive response to issues of
design and local culture that have since been termed critical regionalism. For Bofill such


projects attempt to solve modern problems (mass housing) using modern materials, while
retaining some essence of the region’s natural complexity. However, in the years that
followed, Bofill began to gradually revise this approach to design, arguing that it was
becoming increasingly important to express historical and regional characteristics as well
as geometric ones.

In 1975 Bofill’s design for a large public park ringed by baroque
colonnades won the international design competition for Les Halles in
Paris. The design was already under construction when the mayor of Paris,
Jacques Chirac, ordered that it be abandoned. Despite this setback, Bofill
successfully developed a number of similarly monumental and historically
themed projects in France, including Les Arcades du Lac (1981) and Le
Viaduc (1981), both near Versailles, Les Espaces d’ Abraxas (1983) at
Marne-la-Vallée, Les Echelles du Baroque (1985) in Paris, and Antigone
(1985) in Montpellier. Bofill describes Les Arcades du Lac and Le Viaduc
as “Versailles for the people.” These buildings (the latter over an artificial
lake) incorporate a giant rhythmic system of precast-concrete pilasters,
arched windows, and classical pediments. Below the symmetrical piazza
with its classical fountains and balustrades, are cavernous parking lots. Les
Espaces d’ Abraxas, a development for more than 600 apartments on the
outskirts of Paris, is similarly boldly derivative of French architectural
history and geometry. Les Espaces d’ Abraxas comprises three historic
building types: a semicircular theater, an arc (a habitable arch), and the
palace (a U-shaped block that frames the arc). Each of these buildings is
between 10 and 15 stories high and is clad in an elegant, precast-concrete
panel system. The exterior of the theater features a series of


Les Arcades du Lac (The Lake’s
Arches) and viaduct, St. Quentin en

Yvelines, France, designed by Ricardo
Bofill

© Bernard Annebicque/CORBIS
SYGMA

gigantic Doric columns, each the full height of the building. The inner courtyards are
lined with mirror-glass Corinthian columns, each surmounted by a triple molding
(actually a series of balconies) and a cypress tree. These buildings, along with Les
Echelles du Baroque and Antigone, confirmed Bofill’s reputation as designer of
extravagant, monumental, and theatrical buildings.

In the 1990s Bofill and the Taller continued to design buildings for clients in the
United States, China, and Europe, despite society’s growing rejection of the exuberance
of Postmodern classicism.

By the time that Bofill’s designs for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics were completed,
the approach to architecture that had once earned him great praise, now drew mostly
criticism. Despite this rejection, it is Bofill’s appreciation of the relationship among
geometry, space, and society that remains his greatest strength.

MICHAEL J.OSTWALD

Gaudi, Antoni (Spain); Postmodernism

Biography

Born in Barcelona, Spain, 5 December 1939; son of architect Emilio Bofill. Studied at the
French Institute of Barcelona until 1955; attended Escuela Superior de Arquitectura,
Barcelona 1955-56; studied at Geneva School of Architecture, the University of Geneva,
Switzerland, 1957-60. Founded Barcelona, 1960; opened offices in Paris, 1970, and
New York 1984. Fellow, American Institute of Architects, 1985.

Selected Works

Apartment House, Calle Johannes Sebastian Bach 4, Barcelona, 1965
Schenkel Apartment Building, Calle Nicaragua 99, Barcelona, 1965
La Manzanera (Xanadu) Apartment House, Calpe, Spain, 1967
Kafka’s Castle Vacation Apartments, Barcelona, 1968
Barrio Gaudi Residential Complex, Reus, Spain, 1968
La Muralla Roja Holiday Apartments, Calpe, 1972
Walden-7 Residential Complex, Sant Just Desvern, Barcelona, 1975
Le Viaduc Housing, St. Quentin en Yvelines, France, 1981
Les Arcades du Lac, St. Quentin en Yvelines, France 1981
Les Espaces d’ Abraxas, Marne-la-Vallée, France, 1983

Les Echelles du Baroque Housing Development, Paris, 1985
Antigone, Montpellier, 1985
Les Temples du Lac Housing Development, St. Quentin en Yvelines, 1988

Olympic Village, Barcelona, 1992

Selected Publications

1968

1970

1978

1981
1981

— (exhib. cat.), 1981
(catalog), 1982

1984

1989

Further Reading

Many hundreds of books, papers, and articles have been written about Ricardo Bofill and
the however, no complete catalog of his publications, or of writings about his work has
been published since 1988. James provides a fairly exhaustive list of publications prior to
1988.
Cruells, Bartomeu, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1995
Futagawa, Yukio (editor), New York: Rizzoli, and Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita, 1985
Huart, Annabelle d’ (editor), Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1984
James, Warren A. (editor), New York: Rizzoli, 1988
Jencks, Charles, “Ricardo Bofill and the Taller: Six Characters in Search of a Script,” in
London: Architectural Association, 1981
Stern, Robert A.M., | London: Thames and Hudson, and New York: Rizzoli, 1988

BOHM, GOTTFRIED 1920-

Architect, Germany

Gottfried B6hm’s architecture ranges from the Expressionistic to the experimental. His
early sculptural concrete buildings from the 1960s and 1970s and his vast steel-and-glass
secular buildings of the 1980s and 1990s find few, if any, parallels in other countries.
Béhm’s buildings clearly have a sculptural approach that is seen in the treatment of the
outside form and woven throughout the building, manipulating interior spaces through
the formation of structural elements and details.

Bohm always followed his own style and method of creating architecture. His
buildings range from small-scale to large-scale projects, and his architecture embraces the
simple and the complex by using diverse building materials that range from reinforced
concrete and steel to glass and brick.

The son of the famous church builder Dominikus Béhm (1880-1955), Béhm gained
his reputation through his early churches. In the 1960s, his architecture blended existing
historic city fabrics, integrating his creation into this network of private and public zones
while also interacting with its environment in form, materiality, and color.

From 1942 to 1946, Béhm studied architecture under Adolf Abel and Hans Déllgast,
among others, at the Technische Hochschule (technical university) in Munich. He
received his diploma in 1946 and continued his studies in sculpture under Josef
Henselmann at the Akademie der Bildenden Kiinste (Academy of Fine Arts) in Munich.
His education in both architecture and sculpture significantly influenced his work, as is
clearly seen in his monumental concrete structures of the 1960s and 1970s.

In 1951 Bohm went to the United States to work for the architectural office of Brother
Cajetan Baumann in New York. While there, he visited Ludwig Mies van der Rohe twice
in Chicago and Walter Gropius once at Harvard University.

Although fascinated by the technical perfection of Mies’s buildings, Béhm’s main
influence came from his father. From 1952 until 1955, he collaborated with his father on
multiple church designs, a few single-family homes, a cinema, and projects (1951) for the
Wallraff-Richartz Museum in Cologne. The influence of Mies on their single-family
homes is evident in the Kendler House (1953) in Junkersdorf-Cologne, which clearly
corresponds with Mies’s row house Elmshurst II (1951). Bohm’s Chapel of St. Kolumba
(1950) used rendered shells attached to structural ironwork, creating a sculptural
transitory appearance, as in his father’s Benedictine Abbey (1922) in Vaals. These
influences on his architecture were clearly evident in his early independent projects.

After the death of his father, Bohm took over the existing projects in the office,
transforming the typology of his father’s works, as exemplified in the Church of the
Sacred Heart (1960) in Schildgen and the church project (1959) for Bernkastel-Kues.
From the end of the 1950s to the end of the 1960s, Béhm’s architecture developed
sculpturally and departed from earlier influences. His individualized definition of
architecture was characterized by extreme plasticity and dynamic forms. His was an
architecture that defined masses with contrasting form and light. Béhm strayed from
strict classical geometric forms to free-flowing asymmetrical compositions, which
suggest crystal-shaped compositions in reinforced concrete.

The Church of St. Gertrud (1960-66) in Cologne and the Parish Church of the
Resurrection of Christ and a youth center (1970) in Cologne-Melaten mark a movement
toward his unique sculptural style, culminating in his two masterpieces: the Town Hall
(1962-71) in Bergisch Gladbach-Bensberg and the pilgrimage church of Mary, Queen of
Peace (1963-72), in Velbert-Neviges. These highly acclaimed projects drew on his
father’s architecture and German Expressionism of the early 20th century.

Bohm used highly advanced concrete technology to construct in the manner
prophesied by Bruno Taut, Mies, Hans Poelzig, Max Taut, Hans Scharoun, and others.
The town hall in Bensberg functions as a “city crown,” inspired by Bruno Taut’s
Expressionist vision of the center of cultural-religious life in the city.


In the 1970s, the demand for churches decreased, and secular buildings formed the
majority of the structures built by Béhm. The complex formwork for his concrete
buildings became too expensive for public buildings. The office changed its design
strategy to a more strict orthogonal typology following the ideas of system-based
building, influenced by both the cluster buildings of Aldo van Eyck and Herman
Hertzberger and Peter Cook’s Archigram and its “Plug-in City.”

In the 1970s, steel dominated in the exterior of B6hm’s buildings. These
new influences and materials are clearly present in the pilgrimage church
of Our Lady of the Victory (1972-76) in Opfenbach- Wigratzbad, the town
hall and cultural center (1970-77) in Bocholt, and the renovation and new

building of Castle Saarbriicken (1977-78, 1981-89).

After his neo-Expressionist period of the 1960s and 1970s, Béhm pursued a more
sumptuous strategy. His baroque-like spaces tended toward vastness in volume within
mazes of axial symmetry. One design feature of the Béhm office seems to recur over and
over again; namely, the basilica-based building with nave and two aisles in secular
structures, as seen in the Ziiblin office building (1981-85) in Stuttgart and the Hotel
Maritim (1989) in Cologne. In these projects, parallel office wings are arranged side to
side on a central hall that has a semipublic character and that is used for hosting events,
such as exhibitions and concerts.

In the later 1990s, Béhm’s architecture developed away from the restraints of
symmetry and axial logic. The projects become more fragmented and split into more
layers as he used suspended shell-roof construction, as demonstrated in his design for the
Philharmonic Hall (1997) in Luxembourg. His Peek & Cloppenburg department store
(1995) in Berlin demonstrates his will of form giving, with clear origins in sculpture.

MONIKA EVELYN KOCK
Church; Expressionism; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Taut,

Bruno (Germany)

Biography

Born in Offenbach, Germany, 23 January 1920 as youngest son of Dominikus and Maria
Bohm. After military service from 1938 to 1942, studied at the Technische Hochschule in
Munich and graduated 1946. Added a year of studying sculpture at the Akademie der
Bildenden Kiinste in Munich. Assisted his father in his office 1947-50. Married the
architect Elisabeth Haggenmiiller (1948) and had with her four sons, three of them are
architects: Stephan, Markus, Peter, and Paul. Worked 1950 for Rudolf Schwarz on
planning the reconstruction of Cologne. Worked for six months in 1951 for Cajetan
Baumann in New York. Worked 1952-55 in his father’s office until the 1955 death of
Dominikus Béhm, when Gottfried took over the parental office. Professor for urban
planning and design at the Rheinisch-Westfalischen Technischen Hochschule in Aachen
1963-85. Member of the Akademie der Kiinste in Berlin-Brandenburg from 1968.
Received the major prize of the Bund Deutscher Architekten 1975. Member of the
Deutsche Akademie fiir Stidtebauund Landesplanung in Berlin from 1976. Teaching
appointments in Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts; the

University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia; and Washington University in St. Louis.
Awarded the Fritz-Schuhmacher-Prize in Hamburg 1985. Received the Pritzker
Architecture Prize 1986. Was awarded with many other national and international prizes
and recognitions. He practices and lives in Cologne-Marienburg.

Selected Works

Parish Church of St. Gertrud, Cologne, 1966
Bethanien Village for Children and Young People, Bergisch Gladbach-Refrath, 1968
Parish Church of the Resurrection of Christ and Youth Center, Cologne-Melaten, 1970
Town Hall, Bergisch Gladbach-Bensberg, 1971
Pilgrimage Church of Mary, Queen of Peace, Velbert-Neviges, Bergisches Land, 1972
Pilgrimage Church of Our Lady of the Victory, Opfenbach-Wigratzbad, 1976
Town Hall and Culture Center, Bocholt, 1977
Renovation and New Building of the Central Section of Castle Saarbriicken, 1978,
1989
Prager Platz Residential Development, Berlin, 1980, 1989
Office Building Ziiblin, Stuttgart-Vaihingen, 1985

WDR Arcades, Cologne, 1996

Selected Publications

1950-1980. Cologne: Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther Konig, 1982

Further Reading

Bode, Peter, and Svetlozar Raév, “Gottfried Bohm,” 89 (1978)
Darius, Veronika, Diisseldorf: Beton Verlag, 1988
Pehnt, Wolfgang, “Béhm family. Dominikus, Gottfried, Elisabeth, Stephan, Peter, Paul,”
288 (September 1994)
Pehnt, Wolfgang, Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1999
Raév, Svetlozar (editor), Stuttgart: Karl Kramer Verlag, 1988
Speidel, Manfred, “Gottfried Bohm,” 240 (September 1990)
Weisner, Ulrich, Bielefeld: Kat. Kunsthalle Bielefeld, 1994

BOOTS FACTORY

Designed by Sir Owen Williams; completed 1938 Nottingham, England

The factories designed by the architect and engineer Sir Owen Williams for Boots
Pure Drugs Company in Nottingham are regarded as buildings of seminal importance in
the history of modern architecture in Britain.

Built between 1930 and 1938, the development consists of two large buildings
designed for the manufacture of pharmaceutical products and a collection of smaller
buildings including a fire station. All the buildings still exist, and the factories were
refurbished in 1994.

Owen Williams was born in 1890. He qualified as an engineer in 1911 and a year later
joined the Trussed Concrete and Steel Company, for which he worked as an assistant
engineer prior to establishing his own practice in 1918. Three years later, he was
appointed consulting engineer to the British Empire Exhibition, a commission that
included the design of several large exhibition buildings together with a swimming pool
and a sports stadium for 125,000 spectators at Wembley. It was a turning point in his
career. The buildings, which made extensive use of reinforced concrete, were completed
in record time, and, after the exhibition opened in 1924, Williams was knighted in
recognition of his achievements. He subsequently became a registered architect and in
1930 was appointed to design a large new manufacturing complex for a wide range of
pharmaceutical products for Boots of Nottingham.

Although Boots had originally been founded by Jesse Boots, a local chemist, it was
under American ownership at the time of Williams’s appointment. The United Drugs
Company purchased a 300-acre site at Beeston on the outskirts of Nottingham in 1926,
and their initial design brief required that the complex be contained within one huge
envelope. Williams worked with the client to develop their requirements, and his first
plans were for a single building planned for phased development and designed to
accommodate wet and dry processes of manufacture located to either side of a central
shipping dock.

The first building to be constructed, the Packed Wet Goods Factory, was completed in
1932. Planned as half of the original scheme, the vast concrete, steel, and glass complex
has a footprint of 240,000 square feet. It is organized in five interrelated zones with an
unloading dock to the south, a ground floor manufacturing area with upper floors for
storage of raw materials, a main packaging hall connected to a four-story packed goods
store, and a shipping dock to the north. Administrative offices were integrated into the
scheme in a four-story block along the western edge of the complex, which was also
planned to accommodate the main entrance, laboratories, and a staff canteen.

The organization of the building is dominated by an uncompromising functionalist
approach and an interest in developing an overall systematic method of construction. The
structure consists of reinforced-concrete flat slabs spanning in two directions and
supported on square reinforced-concrete columns with flared capitals. The slabs are

cantilevered at the perimeter and around light wells, and the building is clad with a
glazed-curtain wall.

Like the early buildings designed by Albert Kahn for Henry Ford, the scheme for this
first building was planned to feed raw materials down from the upper levels. Also like
Kahn, Williams was keen to design a building that provided good working conditions,
and this is perhaps most obvious in the use of natural daylight. In addition to an extensive
glazed perimeter, the light wells bring daylight into the heart of the building. In the five-
story packing hall, perhaps the most dramatic space in the scheme, Williams created a
roofing system with 8 1/2-inch-diameter circular glass disks within a 1 3/4-inch-deep
reinforced-concrete slab supported on steel trusses at 30-foot, 8-inch centers. He also
used a similar system over the unloading docks and the manufacturing areas.

In 1935, after Boots Company had been bought back into British ownership, Williams
was commissioned to design additional manufacturing space at Beeston. The “Drys,”
originally conceived as a mirror-image extension to his first building, was eventually
redesigned to be independent and freestanding.

Planned for the manufacture, storage, and dispatch of powders, tablets, and other dry
products, the design of this building is simpler than the earlier factory. It consists of three
zones planned for incoming raw materials, manufacture, and packaging and shipping. A
five-story central spine houses manufacturing processes that are top fed as in the “Wets”
Building. However, the atria were omitted. Single-story spaces at either side provide for
incoming raw materials to the south and for outgoing finished materials to the north.

Although built in reinforced concrete, the structural system is also different. Flat-slab
construction, limited to the central spine building, is carefully integrated with the
structure of the roofs over the single-story bays at either side. Nine-foot-deep Z section
beams of reinforced concrete span 92 feet to the north and 215 feet to the south with
extraordinary cantilevers of 30 feet and 48 feet, respectively, providing column-free
unloading and loading docks. At the point where these beams meet the multistory spine,
they are suspended from concrete hangers that are exposed on the elevation and that in
turn are suspended from deep beams at roof level. Williams, who also sought to integrate
structural and servicing systems, designed these hangers to be hollow, and they house air-
extract ducts.

Perhaps it is not surprising that these buildings appear to be inspired by American
practice, for the first was commissioned by an American client; designed to optimize
materials and structural systems developed by engineers such as Ernest Ransome, Turner,
and the Trussed Steel Concrete Company; and constructed after a series of large
reinforced-concrete industrial buildings designed by Albert Kahn that had been widely
publicized. However, they should also be considered in a lineage that includes the
significant work of Maillart, Freysinnet, and Perret in Europe. Williams’s buildings for
Boots, which explore the potential of structure, rational systems, and materials at a grand
scale, have been fittingly described as Joseph Paxton’s Crystal Palace of the 20th century.

BRIAN CARTER

Factory; Kahn, Albert (United States)

Further Reading

(25 November 1938)
Cottam, David, London: Architectural Association, 1986
Roth, Alfred, (trilingual English-German-French edition), Zurich: Girsberger,
1940; Sth edition, 1951
Whyte, Iain Boyd, “Boots Wets Factory, Beeston (Nottingham), 1927-1933,” 61
(December 1997-January 1998)
Williams, Owen, (25 May 1933)

BOSTON CITY HALL

Designed by Kallmann, McKinnell and Knowles; completed 1969

Boston, Massachusetts

The Boston City Hall is a modern architectural icon that has served and identified the
citizens of Boston since 1969. It is the product of the Boston architectural firm Kallmann,
McKinnell and Knowles, now Kallmann, McKinnell and Wood, and a national design
competition held in 1962. The site is in the center of the historic Boston urban fabric in a
plaza created by architect I.M.Pei. The trapezoidal site, comparable in scale to St. Mark’s
Square in Venice, provides one of the earliest modern exterior public spaces in a large
American city.

Gerhard Kallmann and Michael McKinnell, along with Edward Knowles, formed their
office with this project. Kallmann, the eldest member of the team, German born and
English educated, provided the philosophical expressions of the theory and the design
ideas. McKinnell, English born and educated, has shared Kallmann’s inclusive and
sensitive approach to architecture for all the years of the office’s existence. Both have
served as practicing architects, as educators at the Harvard Graduate School of Design,
and as researchers and historians. Henry Wood joined the firm in 1965.

The Boston City Hall expresses the design quality and philosophy of the firm. It is the
historical foundation of its design credits and the initial expression of its goals achieved
in the built environment. It is not easy to understand the building without a context or
background in architecture. At the same time, it is a building much appreciated and
generally valued and approved by architects and architecture critics.

Writing in in 1959, Gerhard Kallmann, as an educator, not yet practicing or having
designed the City Hall, sought to generate a new spirit of creativity in architectural
designers. Modernism as a style dominated the architectural scene, and its success was
multiplied by the large amounts of construction in the postwar period that conveyed that
visual image. It was a time of rigid stylistic dogma, well-established rules, and culturally
defined and accepted physical forms. In the face of systems processes and deterministic
products, Kallmann argued for and encouraged young architects to maintain confidence
in the traditional architectural problem-solving processes and insights. As Kallmann


demonstrates in the Boston City Hall, it is critical that human emotions and expressions
overcome system processes that produce homogeneous and stylistically dead
metropolitan environments.

In place of static modernism design approaches, Kallmann and McKinnell
championed the “New Brutalism” style. The work of Le Corbusier and the refining
qualities of Louis Kahn’s work served as springboards for the office to create a new
physical expression with a new direction affording new opportunities within the modern
movement. In a lecture in 1959, Kallmann stated that this new direction “in its physical
concreteness and firmness of build, strives for a confirmation of identity and existence to
counter the modern fear of nothingness.”

As a development of Kahn’s ideas of rigor and order within the context of New
Brutalism, form, symbolism, function, and technology are balanced and integrated in the
Boston City Hall. Form is the classical tripartite massing of base, body, and cap. Contrast
and tension in this scheme is achieved by inverting the masses. The large, ordered, and
repetitive office spaces are at the top. The body, or central portion of the tower,
symbolically expresses the central government process of council and mayor with clear
and bold forms. The base is open and accessible, inviting and encouraging the public to
enter and traverse the dramatic, interpenetrating interior arrival and circulation spaces.
The entire project is set on a brick plaza base that serves as a public
gathering space and a Boston focal point. As an exterior circulation area, it
encourages movement through the plaza into the building and around to

Faneuil Hall, the markets, and the waterfront.

Boston City Hall, designed by
Kallmann, McKinnell and Knowles
(1968)

© G.E.Kidder-Smith, Courtesty of Kidder

Smith Collection, Rotch Visual Collections,
M.LT.

The symbolism of the government is expressed as both authoritarian and
human, inviting participation by the citizenry of Boston. There is a clear
expression of the government functions within a complexity that invites
interest and a desire to be included.

One element that fails in this openness and opportunity for public involvement is the
long, high wall along Congress Street. It reflects the quality of monumental, institutional
scale typical of the modern artifacts at the time of its design. The wall serves as a brick
barrier, unsympathetic to the pedestrian path at its side.

Analysis of the architecture of the Boston City Hall reveals an uncommon balance
between the need to provide form, function, and technology. The integration of
environmental systems with the building structure and form is well studied and
developed. In what has become for the firm an opportunity to explore and express the
central concepts of their design philosophy, the structural elements serve not only to
support the building loads but also to formally become elements of style that define entry,
wall, space, and program.

Daylighting and electric lighting are integrated so as to reveal the total architecture
and provide a cohesive fabric that underlies the total experience. The integration of the
air-handling ducts within the columns and beams successfully provides the services of the
system without focusing attention on the technology.

The use of exposed concrete as the building material is an issue for some of those who
are accustomed to the softer textures and feel of wood and the more human scale of
masonry. Concrete is a cold, hard material, lacking the scale of detail in classical
masonry and stone construction. One must realize that this type of construction was new
and provided the opportunity for the “Brutal” style of modern architecture to come into
being. This building, through detail and complexity of form and scale, overcomes the
lack of historic context and precedence. However, the grayish values remain cold and
provide a counterresistance to the open, inviting appearance.

Today, although the building is recognized as an architectural icon, societal changes
and the growth of the Boston City government have generated calls for renovation and
even replacement. The biggest disappointment is the failure of the surrounding urban
community to successfully develop the plaza boundaries and walls. The exterior space
fails to provide the human qualities of scale, texture, and meaning that are so
characteristic of the historic Boston urban scene. The surrounding structures have not
provided the sense of place and balance of enclosure, entry, passage, and definition that is
characteristic of European piazzas. The reference to the comparable size of St. Mark’s
Square is limited to that parameter.

Despite these qualifications, the Boston City Hall is a building of quality and historic
significance. The style, program, holistic expression, and historic significance in the
annals of modern architecture make it one of the truly great buildings in the United
States.

. JACK KREMERS
Brutalism; City Hall; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard)
(France); Kahn, Louis (United States); Pei, ILM. (United States)

Further Reading

Huxtable, Ada Louise, “Boston’s New City Hall: A Public Building of Quality,” (8
February 1969)

Kay, Jane Holtz, “Prizes Underscore Trend to Area Harmony,” (25 May 1969)
Kennedy, Lawrence, Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992
Krieger, Alex (editor), New York: Rizzoli, 1998
Lyndon, Donlyn, New York: Random House, 1982

Schmertz, Mildred F., “Boston’s New City Hall: A Competition- Winner Built,”
(February 1969)
Southworth, Michael, and Susan Southworth, | Chester, Connecticut: Globe Pequot
Press, 1984; 2nd edition, as 1992

BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS

Notwithstanding the influential career of Henry Hobson Richardson, the 19th century
ended in Boston with the construction of one of the most important buildings in the
history of American architecture: McKim, Mead and White’s Boston Public Library
(1895). This “People’s Palace,” designed in the form of an Italian Renaissance palace,
monumentalizes the importance of education in a city self-consciously marking its
preeminence in the various fields of learning. Using Henri Labrouste’s Bibliothéque Ste.-
Geneviéve (1850) in Paris as his model, Charles McKim created an American paragon of
Beaux-Arts design, integrating architecture, sculpture, murals, mosaics, and stained glass
into an aesthetic whole.

The neoclassical architecture displayed at the Boston Public Library and the World’s
Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago led to a renaissance of this style across the
country. Boston embraced the planning principles of the “White City” with its “Boston-
1915” movement, a Progressive Era crusade to remake the city by the year 1915. The
most important legacy of this City Beautiful movement was the creation of the Boston
Planning Board (see Kennedy, 1992) and buildings such as Shepley, Rutan and
Coolidge’s Harvard Medical School (1907), Guy Lowell’s Museum of Fine Arts (1909),
and William Welles Bosworth’s Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) campus
(1916), called the “great white city’ on the Charles River.

During the early years of skyscraper design, Boston lagged behind Chicago and New
York in technological innovation. Most notably, Boston preferred not to erect numerous
tall buildings. The most important historicized skyscraper in Boston from the early 20th
century was the Custom House tower (1915) by Peabody and Stearns. A federal structure,
the tower was not limited to Boston’s height restrictions.

The first Art Deco skyscraper to appear in Boston was the United Shoe Machinery
Building (1930) by Parker, Thomas and Rice. Mingled among the more recent glass box
skyscrapers of Boston’s financial district, one still finds a number of step-back forms,
notably Cram and Ferguson’s U.S. Post Office (1931). Boston architect Ralph Adams

Cram was best known for his Gothic Revival ecclesiastical work in Boston and around
the United States, including collegiate designs for Princeton University and West Point.

Cram’s medievalism contrasts sharply with progressive architectural design, which
began in earnest with the arrival of leading modernist Walter Gropius in 1937. Gropius
became chairman of the Department of Architecture at Harvard University from 1938 to
1952 and reorganized the program along Bauhaus lines, transforming American
architectural education in the process. The residence that Gropius built for himself (1938,
with Marcel Breuer) in the suburb of Lincoln, Massachusetts, features an International
Style flat roof, ribbon windows, and a factory aesthetic that was new to the New England
landscape. Gropius formed The Architects’ Collaborative (TAG) in 1945, an
experimental group of architects responsible for the Graduate Center at Harvard (1950).

Not long after the ascendancy of Gropius at Harvard came alternatives to the
International Style with Alvar Aalto’s Baker House (1949) at MIT, a student dormitory
featuring a serpentine plan and brick facade, and Eero Saarinen’s Kresge Auditorium
(1955) and Kresge Chapel (1955), also on the MIT campus. Aalto’s dormitory is
especially significant, as it is one of only two Aalto-designed buildings in the United
States. Like those at other campuses, these buildings are examples of postwar campus
expansion at Boston-area colleges and universities. The European influence on American
architecture continued with Le Corbusier’s only building in North America, the Carpenter
Center for the Visual Arts (1963) on the Harvard campus. Constructed of reinforced
concrete, the building’s effect is quite sculptural with its play of voids and solids on the
facade. Characteristic of Le Corbusier is the prominent ramp that extends through the
center of building. Sited among Harvard’s traditional brick buildings along Quincy
Street, the Carpenter Center seems strikingly noncontextual at the dawn of the 21st
century.

Le Corbusier’s colleague, José Luis Sert, succeeded Gropius as dean of Harvard’s
architecture program from 1953 to 1969 and brought modern urban design principles to
the city. Despite the lack of original Le Corbusier designs in Boston, his impact on the
city’s architecture was enormous. The prime example is the Boston City Hall (1968) by
the then-unknown architectural firm of Kallman, McKinnell and Knowles, who won the
national competition with a design based on Le Corbusier’s Monastery of La Tourette
(1955) in France. Although the American Institute of Architects voted City Hall the sixth-
greatest building in American history in 1976, the fortresslike concrete structure in the
Brutalist style and its vacant, windswept plaza have been a source of criticism among
populists over the years.

The construction of the Boston City Hall was part of a massive urban-
renewal campaign that remade the city in the 1950s and 1960s. The first
target was the city’s west end, a crowded immigrant neighborhood
demolished in the 1950s and replaced with complexes such as Paul
Rudolph’s State Health, Education and Welfare Service Center (1970).
The destruction of this lively streetscape has since served as a lesson for
city planners, urging subsequent generations to respect Boston’s unique
scale and layout. Urban renewal continued in the 1960s with the “New

Boston” program under Mayor John F.Collins and Boston


View of Hancock Tower and Copley
Square buildings from one side of the
skywalk at the Prudential Center.
Includes Trinity Church, the Hancock
Tower, and neighboring buildings.

© Kevin Fleming/CORBIS

Redevelopment Authority Director Edward Logue with the demolition of Scollay Square,
an area notorious for tattoo parlors and burlesque entertainment. Replacing such urban
blight was the new Government Center (1960, master plan designed by I.M.Pei and
Partners), a complex of modern buildings dominated by City Hall.

One outcome of postwar urban renewal in Boston was an increased interest in historic
preservation. Preservation in Boston was not new; the Society for the Preservation for
New England Antiquities (SPNEA), founded by William Sumner Appleton, had been
purchasing and restoring colonial architecture since its establishment in 1910. Outraged
by the large-scale destruction of the west end in the 1950s, preservationists rallied for
saving historic structures throughout the city. Boston became a leader in this movement,
and adaptive re-use became a viable alternative to demolition. A prime example is the old
Boston City Hall (1865), originally designed by Arthur Gilman and Gridley J. Fox Bryant
in the French Renaissance Revival style and renovated into offices and a restaurant in
1970 by Anderson, Notter Associates.

Preserving the historic character of Copley Square was the challenge faced by Henry
Cobb of LM.Pei and Associates in designing the tallest skyscraper in Boston, the John
Hancock Tower (1975). Two of Boston’s most important historic buildings, the Boston
Public Library and Henry Hobson Richardson’s Trinity Church (1877), face each other
across the Square. A site to the south of the church became the location of the Hancock
Tower, a 60-story reflective-glass-surface skyscraper. Cobb angled the building with the
shortest facade of the trapezoidal structure facing Copley Square so that the enormous

building would minimally impact Trinity Church. Although considered by many to be
aesthetically successful, the building has had more than its share of structural and
engineering problems, leading to the complete replacement of all its reflective-glass
windows (see Robert Campbell’s [1988] interview with structural engineer William Le
Messurier).

The 1980s witnessed a building boom in Boston in which oversized developments
sometimes caused community backlash. A case in point is the 500 Boylston Street project
(1989), a Postmodern high-rise designed by John Burgee Architects with Philip Johnson.
Public outcry was directed against the building’s proximity to Trinity Church and its
shadow-casting enormity. As a result, only half of the one-block complex was completed
before Robert Stern was asked to step in and design the second tower at 222 Berkeley
Street (1989), complete with Postmodernist historical references. Other important
Postmodern Boston buildings include 75 State Street (1988, Graham Gund and Skidmore,
Owings and Merrill), an Art Deco revival skyscraper, and Philip Johnson’s International
Place (1992) with its repetitive facade of Palladian windows.

History continues to play an important part in the architecture of the city, as it did with
the construction of the Beaux-Arts Boston Public Library at the close of the 19th century.
At the beginning of the 21st century, restoration, preservation, and historicism continue
to abide in this historic American city.

KERRY DEAN CARSO
Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Art Deco; Boston City Hall; City Beautiful
Movement; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Cram,
Ralph Adams (United States); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Johnson,
Philip (United States); Library; McKim, Mead and White (United States);
Pei, LM. (United States); Saarinen, Eero (Finland); Sert, Josep Lluis
(United States); Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United States);

Skyscraper; The Architects Collaborative (TAG) (United States)

Further Reading

The most comprehensive architectural history of 20th-century Boston is Douglass Shand-
Tucci’s . Miller and Morgan is an excellent source for individual buildings and contains
high-quality photographs. Kennedy provides a well-written history of city planning in
Boston from the earliest settlement up to the late 20th century.

Campbell, Robert, “Learning from the Hancock,” (March 1988)

Campbell, Robert, and Peter Vanderwarker, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992
Curtis, Wiliam J.R., Boston: Institute of Contemporary Art, 1980
Eldredge, Joseph L., Barre, Massachusetts: Barre, 1976
Goody, Joan, | Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1965

Herdeg, Klaus, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1983
Holleran, Michael, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988
Kay, Jane Holtz, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980; expanded and updated edition, 1999
Kennedy, Lawrence, Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992

Krieger, Alex, and David Cobb (editors), Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999

Lindgren, James, New York, Oxford: University Press, 1955
Lynch, Kevin, | Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1960
Miller, Naomi, and Keith Morgan, Munich: Prestel, 1990

Shand-Tucci, Douglass, Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1999
Southworth, Michael, and Susan Southworth, Chester, Connecticut: Globe Pequot
Press, 1984

Whitehill, Walter Muir, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1959;
2nd edition, 1968

BOTTA, MARIO 1943—

Architect, Switzerland

Mario Botta gained architectural fame during the early 1970s when he began
designing small houses in the Ticino region of Switzerland.

Botta completed an apprenticeship with Tita Carloni and architectural studies in Milan
and Venice, prior to opening his own office in 1969. The houses he designed during the
early 1970s established the Ticino school and changed Swiss architec-ture dramatically.
It is largely because of Botta’s innovative work that the present generation of Swiss
architects is internationally acclaimed.

During the 1970s and early 1980s, the Ticino region changed from a primarily
agricultural economy, to an industrial one that emphasizes tourism. The primary cause of
this change was the integration of this region into the European highway system at the
beginning of the 1960s. Most of the Ticino architects built for the wealthy bourgeoisie
who profited from the economic change, and Botta’s first commissions came either from
clients to whom he was recommended by his mentor Carloni, or from his relatives. In
addition, he participated in competitions, either alone or with older colleagues, such as
Luigi Snozzi, Carloni, and Aurelio Galfetti.

The Ticino school generates its designs from architectural and contextual
requirements. Architecturally, the buildings exhibit their materials and construction
openly. Simple forms characterize typical examples, with a focus on mass and contour
line, and ornamentation derived from structure and construction technology.
Contextually, these designs attempt to relate the old to the new. The old comes from
architectural typology and the vernacular traditions, and the new stems from building
technology. In addition, these architects intend to express a mythical topography of the
Ticino region, or what is termed the natural calling of the site. This architecture attempts
to continue the trends already apparent in the organization of the land, and to realize
them in an architecture conceived as an act of culture, which incorporates geometry and
history.

For Botta, the dignity of architecture results not from intuition, but from architecture’s
own rules and from history. He proposes that history is the place where architecture finds
and defines its meaning. Form and meaning are determined through the relationship to
historical buildings, especially the local Romanesque and baroque churches. New
meanings can be derived only from these familiar themes, and it is only secondarily that

meaning is created through sociocultural usage. Botta’s designs aim to contrast physical,
social, and cultural traditions to the transient phenomena of modern life.

Botta began in the 1960s, with designs that were inspired by the postwar
work of his idols: Le Corbusier and Louis Kahn. During the 1970s, he
transformed his theories into buildings that had a strong formal quality.
The Bianchi House (1973) in Riva San Vitale is a mysterious, isolated
tower that stands up to the surrounding mountains. It is defined by corner
supports and a roof slab, and allows outside views by increasing the
opening of the construction shell as it rises. The confrontational position
of the house to its site emerges in the entrance bridge, which

San Francisco Museum of Modern Art,
California, designed by Mario Botta
(1994)

© Mary Ann Sullivan

articulates the detachment between natural and man-made, resulting in stark, bizarre
forms.

Botta’s buildings impress through their strong image quality, which might be
interpreted as cultural resistance intent on a new order and meaning. The houses are
devoid of clustered compositions or extensions. The massive exterior walls establish a
sharp datum. Through such devices, the Casa Rotonda (1981) in Stabio establishes an
unexpected presence within an anonymous context. The building is derived from
geometric form. The seemingly impenetrable, cylindrical shape contrasts with the large
cuts in its surface and suggests an opposition between fortification and openness. The
Casa Rotonda questions our assumptions concerning the nature of dwellings;

conventional or traditional elements are eliminated. Moreover, everything is subordinated
to form. The interior is laid out symmetrically around the central slot of the stairwell and
skylight, and rooms are irregular, leftover spaces resulting from inserting a rectangular
grid into the house’s cylinder.

In larger designs, the geometrical forms became megastructures. The Middle School
(1977) in Morbio Inferiore, uses a bridge typology for the arrangement of its eight
classroom clusters. The complex is an orderly architectural composition with openings,
covered areas, porticoes, and passages. Modular units are repeated to generate the overall
shape, and to make the organizational structure of the building easily apparent. A
spatially diverse, skylit central passage creates a rich variety of spaces inside this simple
form.

In the State Bank (1982) in Fribourg, Botta managed to fit his building into an existing
urban situation. A protruding cylindrical volume dominates a public square, and turns the
corner while the two receding wings relate to the rhythm and scale of the buildings on the
flanking streets. Botta used this approach of dividing a large building into different
shapes and facade articulations frequently during the 1980s.

In the late 1980s, the images of the facades became dominant in Botta’s buildings;
they became figures in which typical details from his earlier designs were re-used. In his
Union Bank (1995) in Basel, the facade, curved toward the square, impresses as a heavy
bastion. It opens into a cavity that is partly filled by a massive pier on a broad base.
Although such shapes are appropriate for a bank building, they become disturbing when
used for other building types. The large cubical forms used for the Housing Complex
(1982) in Novazzano appear to be without scale and meaningless, because they are not
finished in Botta’s traditional brick veneer. The absence of this craft surface reveals the
emptiness of these forms.

A disappointing aspect of Botta’s architecture is that most of his buildings seem to
embody the same vision. Now, his repetitive cylinders have appeared in all parts of the
world for the most diverse functions, such as museums, churches, single-family homes,
shopping centers, and office buildings, as well as in his furniture designs and household
appliances.

. HANS R.MORGENTHALER
Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Kahn, Louis
(United States)

Biography

Born in Mendrisio, Switzerland, 1 April 1943. Apprentice building draftsman, office of
Carloni and Camenisch, Lugano, Switzerland 1958-61; attended the Liceo Artistico,
Milan 1961-64; studied under Guiseppe Mazariol; attended the Istituto Universitario de
Architettura, Venice 1964-69; received a degree in architecture 1969; studied under
Carlo Scarpa. Assistant to Le Corbusier, Venice and Paris 1965. Private practice, Lugano
from 1969; member, Swiss Federal Commission for the Fine Arts 1982-87. Professor,
Ecole Polytechnique Federal, Lausanne, Switzerland from 1983; visiting professor, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut 1987; committee member, International Course for
Architectural Planning, Andrea Palladio International Centre for Architectural Studies

1989. Member, Federation of Swiss Architects 1978; honorary fellow, Bund Deutscher
Architekten 1983; honorary fellow, American Institute of Architects 1984; member,
Academie d’Architecture, Paris 1991.

Selected Works

Bianchi House, Riva San Vitale, Switzerland, 1973
Secondary School, Morbio Inferiore, Ticino, Switzerland, 1977
Library, Capuchin Convent, Lugano, Switzerland, 1979
Casa Rotondo, Stabio, Switzerland, 1981
State Bank, Fribourg, Switzerland, 1982
Housing Complex, Novazzano, Switzerland, 1982
Ransila I Building, Lugano, Switzerland, 1985
André Malraux Maison de la Culture, Chambéry, France, 1987
Mediathéque, Villeurbanne, France, 1988
Art Gallery, Tokyo, 1990
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, 1994

Union Bank, Basel, Switzerland, 1995

Selected Publications

“Architecture and Environment,” (June 1979)
“Swiss Transmission and Exaggerations” (interview), 2/8 (1980)
“Ein Raum fiir Guernika,” —_—‘11 (1981)
1982

Further Reading

A fairly complete and well-illustrated three-volume catalog of Botta’s work has recently
been published (Pizzi, 1993-98). Botta’s designs usually receive ample coverage in
architectural magazines, while scholarly articles are scarce.
Abrams, Janet, “Mario Botta’s San Francisco Museum of Modern Art,” 86 (1995)
Bedaria, Marc, “The House of Culture of Chambery: An Example of Decentralization,”
43 (1984)
Botta, Mario, and Enzo Cucchi, (bilingual Italian-English edition), Turin: Umberto
Allemandi, 1994
Carloni, Tita, “Architect of the Wall and Not of the Trilith,” 86 (1983)
Dimitri, Livio, “Architecture and Morality—An Interview with Mario Botta,” 20 (1983)
Frampton, Kenneth, “Mario Botta and the School of the Ticino,” 14 (Fall 1978)
Musi, Pino, and Marco d’ Anna, edited by Luca Molinari, Milan: Skira, 1998
Nicolin, Pierluigi, New York: Rizzoli, and London: Electra/Architectural Press,
1984
Pizzi, Emilio, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1991

Pizzi, Emilio, 3 vols., Zurich: Artemis, 1993-98
Purini, Franco, “Inner Voices: Observations on Architecture and Mario Botta,” 48-49
(1986)
Zardini, Mirko, New York: Rizzoli, 1985

BRASILIA, BRAZIL 1955-60

The construction of Brasilia, the much-maligned capital city of Brazil, represents an
important and cathartic moment in the history of modern architecture and the
International Style. As well as becoming a national emblem for the geographically
disparate country, Brasilia has also become, in more recent times, a symbol for some of
the perceived shortcomings of the modernist movement. Bringing together many of the
European ideals that had accompanied the Utopian urban plans of the postwar years,
Brasilia necessitated the deployment of monumental architecture on a scale almost
unprecedented in the 20th century. The emphasis on establishing a new cultural identity
for the South American power was interwoven with the global architectural language of
Oscar Niemeyer and the Le Corbusian-inspired planning of his mentor Lucio Costa. The
optimistic proposal was to be realized within an incredibly short construction period and
in the wake of enormous political pressure.

The decision to relocate the Brazilian capital from Rio de Janeiro to Brasilia in the
isolated interior of the country was set against a backdrop of domestic instability and
individual ambition. In 1955 Juscelino Kubitschek had been elected president of Brazil
by a slender margin and without a party majority. The decision to build a new capital was
motivated by the need to consolidate the support of a marginal electorate as well as the
need to project Brazil into the technological age. The geography of the country had
dictated much of the political and economic structure of Brazil, concentrating most of the
population and industry along the scenic Atlantic coast that housed most of Brazil’s
major cities. An inland capital was intended to not only symbolically relocate the seat of
national power but also shift the demographic and economic focus away from the
European colonial powers and toward the vast domestic hinterland. This was part of
Kubitschek’s nationwide industrialization process that sought to rapidly develop rural and
remote regions of Brazil and bring egalitarian prosperity to the emerging country. The
new capital was to be a symbol for this modernization, establishing a new national
identity and offering the opportunity to reform the convoluted bureaucracy of the old
capital in Rio.

The fact that Kubitschek was limited to a single five-year term in office necessitated
that the epic project be realized within this period. The vast scale and enormous technical
impediments to the project meant that the preliminary design of the city had to be
undertaken with speed and efficiency. Brazil’s most internationally renowned architect,
Oscar Niemeyer, who had previously worked with Kubitschek, was appointed to direct
the works and given complete control over the design and construction process. On 16
March 1957, Niemeyer announced a national competition for the master plan of the new
capital and, as an important member of the jury, was instrumental in awarding the


winning scheme to Lucio Costa (his teacher and former employer). Niemeyer was to be
the architect for the buildings extending a long period of successful collaboration
between the two men. Construction was begun in 1957 and the new capital city was
inaugurated on schedule on 21 April 1960.

Costa’s plan for the city was hinged around the intersection of two monumental axes,
marking Brasilia as the symbolic and geographic center of Brazil. The characteristic
arrangement houses the three branches of government—legislative, executive, and
judicial—along a lineal central axis that Costa calls the Plaza of the Three Powers. From
here, two wings radiate in either direction, housing the ministry buildings and embassies,
giving the plan a diagrammatic relationship to a modern aircraft. This cruciform plan was
an important symbol aligning the new capital not only with more traditional Catholic
typology but also with the pervasive imagery of modernism, progress, and flight. Unlike
the congested streets of Brazil’s coastal metropolises, the new capital was serviced by
broad, expansive highways that celebrated automation and the technological convenience
of the modern age.

Costa had followed Le Corbusier’s Ville Radieuse (Radial City) (partially,
implemented at Chandigarh) by isolating the political and administrative centers of the
new capital from the housing and recreational facilities, which radiated out from the
circumference of this new monolithic center. However, it was the imposing architectural
composition of Niemeyer that most clearly reiterated the formal principles of Le
Corbusian modernism. The language of Niemeyer’s grandiose structures betrayed a
profound allegiance to Le Corbusier and, in particular, his work at Chandigarh.
Niemeyer, in reverence to the Punjab capital, implemented a simple but elegant
geometric language to articulate the colossal monuments of Costa’s plan. The austerity of
this new architectural entourage, like many modernist projects, attempted a synthesis
between an idealistic social vision and pure geometric form. The attenuated scale of the
buildings deployed in the capital worked with the master plan to facilitate a
characteristically modernist reunification between architecture, nature, and the individual.

The Plaza of the Three Powers represents the political and architectural epicenter for
the new capital. The elegant Palacio de Planalto (Highland Palace) became the new seat
for Brazil’s government, housed within a single structure running parallel to the plaza.
Giant, curved concrete pilasters articulate the exterior of the building, allowing the roof
and floors to float gracefully above the ground. Opposite the palace and separated by a
broad public space is the Supreme Court, which employs a similar language of forms to
the palace with the strong rhythm of sculptural pilasters that dominates the elevation. In
the vast space between these two buildings, along the center of the axis, is the Museum of
the City of Brasilia, characterized by a dramatic horizontal cantilever that memorializes
the construction of the city. A large bust of Kubitschek faces back toward the palace,
unmistakably commemorating the president responsible.

The central axis is also the site of several important cultural buildings including the
National Theatre and the sculptural Metropolitan Chapel. The chapel, in particular, is an
important structure subtly demarcating the roles of politics and religion within Costa’s
plan for a Utopian urbanism. The poetic conical structure is formed by 16 bent concrete
pilasters opening out at the top to form a crown. Between the concrete supports is a
mosaic of colored glass (redesigned in 1970 by Marianne Peretti) transmitting a powerful
spirituality to the internal space. This is heightened by the entry procedure, which takes


visitors underground before depositing them dramatically in the center of the internalized
crystal chamber. The National Theatre also makes use of a pyramidal form elegantly
housing two theaters within a terraced subterranean crater.

The end of the Plaza of the Three Powers is punctuated by the third major
administrative building—the authoritative residence of the Congress. This colossal
structure dominates the surrounding landscape with two slender concrete towers on a
broad horizontal plinth. The two bodies of congress (the House of Deputies and the
Senate) are expressed by two enormous parabolic dishes, one inverted, that are located on
either side of the two towers above the podium. The circular form of the dishes allows a
seductive interior layout for the two legislative bodies, distributing, rather than focusing,
power.

The playful composition of the Congress, set against the expansive public spaces of
the plaza, marks the hierarchical apex of the axis forming a hinging point in the whole
design. Costa’s plan is reminiscent of the principles of the colonial baroque architecture
(evident in many coastal cities of Brazil) that established primary and secondary
functional corridors. Architecturally, Neimeyer established this hierarchy through the use
of form and finish to distinguish between the sacred Plaza of the Three Powers and the
secondary administrative axis that bisects it. The various ministries that make up the two
curved wings of the plan are accommodated within undistinguished Cartesian office
blocks, less elaborate than the parliamentary buildings in both form and execution.

Recent writers have applied a more critical eye to Brasilia and observed that
Niemeyer’s structures unwillingly enforced a cultural hierarchy by allocating expensive
finishes and detailing to the institutional structures and neglecting the sites of work and
eisure. Unlike the rough Brutalism of Chandigarh, which was uncompromising in its
rough-cast concrete finish, many of the significant buildings of Brasilia are finished with
luxurious yet cosmetic surfaces like marble, metal, and mirrored panels. The most
pronounced contrast with this, and the subject of many contemporary critiques of the city,
is embodied in the sprawling housing sectors that surround the capital and quickly
became the scene of crime, poverty, and disease. As a result, Brasilia became a city of
transit for politicians who generally resided in Rio de Janeiro and visited the capital only
intermittently. The residents of the city, many of whom had been instrumental in its
construction, were relegated to ramshackle favelas enveloping the periphery of the city.
This divisive relationship between the center and the periphery seemingly enforces a rigid
social stratification between the monumental majesty of the governing elite and the
working-class squatters, betraying the egalitarian rhetoric that initially inspired the
construction of the new capital.

Nowhere is the decadent luxury of Brasilia more evident than in the lavish presidential
palace, which exists on an isolated site apart from the other institutional buildings.
Known as the Alvarado Palace, the expansive residence was the first building completed
at Brasilia and remains one of the most recognizable and influential of Niemeyer’s
buildings. It quickly became the architectural symbol of the new capital. The palace
employs a similar language to the Federal Government and Supreme Court monuments,
dominated by an inverted arched colonnade that sinks gracefully into a pristine reflecting
pond. The palace incorporates a private chapel, signaling the seamless influence of the
Catholic Church on the affairs of state. Located at the side of the imposing palace, the
plan of the chapel is based on a sweeping spiral that, like the plastic forms of Le


Corbusier’s Ronchamp, leads the visitor from the sculptural whitewashed exterior toward
a discreet and contemplative altar. The geographic and spiritual isolation of the residence,
as well as its imposing scale, further elaborates the social stratification intrinsic to the
program of the new Capital.

Only four years after the city’s completion, Brazil was the victim of a military coup
that instantaneously reversed the democratic and egalitarian principles that had initially
inspired the construction of the new capital. The next 20 years within the country were
characterized by a turbulent political landscape that ultimately led Niemeyer to live in
exile in Europe for several years. Despite this, Niemeyer, although occasionally
distancing himself from the design of the city, continued his association with the capital
under the new regime, finishing the construction of several important buildings, including
the Ministry of Justice. Significantly, in 1980 Niemeyer proposed a monument to
commemorate the death of Juscelino Kubitschek, who had been the political and spiritual
force behind the new city. The monument, whose form is reminiscent of the hammer and
sickle, houses the tomb of the former president in a serene underground chamber.
However, possibly the most elegant and graceful of all of the buildings at Brasilia is
the Pantheon of Liberty and Democracy, completed in 1987 in memory of Tancredo
Neves. The poetic reinforced concrete sails of the pyre now enclose the southern end of
the Plaza of the Three Powers, juxtaposed against the robust silhouette of the congress
building at the northern end. The expressive structure subtly completes the urban
composition, complementing the formal austerity of the earlier monumental structures
with contemporary images of peace and harmony.

Despite failing in its intention to create a more egalitarian society through pure
architectural expression, the city of Brasilia remains a powerful urban gesture, layered
with symbolism of form and meaning deployed across a rich architectural tapestry. The
dominant scenography, rigid geometric planning, and uniform aesthetic language
effectively unite the diverse political, social, and artistic forces of the turbulent South
American nation, forming a capital that is as inspirational as it is imperfect. The elegant
poetry, epic scale, and often-naife socialism embodied in the monumental forms provide
an important commentary on both the best and worst aspects of the Modern movement.

MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Chandigarh, India; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France);

Costa, Lucio (Brazil); Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil)

Further Reading
Botey, Joseph Ma, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1996
Evenson, Norma, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973
Holston, James, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989

Underwood, David, New York: Rizzoli, 1994

BRAZIL

The 20th-century architecture of Brazil became widely famous for its originality and
formal freedom in contrast to more codified paradigms of modernism. Celebrated abroad
as a step ahead of functionalism and rationalism, Brazilian modernism acquired
international significance in the 1950s, and the effects of it can still be found in
contemporary architecture. However, to grasp the full scope of Brazilian 20th-century
architecture, it is necessary to understand the radical transformations in its economy and
society that led to an accelerated process of urbanization. From 17 million inhabitants in
1900, 70 percent of whom were living in rural areas, Brazil closed the century with
almost 170 million, with more than 60 percent living in urban areas.

Brazilians entered the 20th century under the influence of positivism and sanitary
engineering as two events of 1897 indicate: the planned city of Belo Horizonte was
inaugurated to replace the 18th-century Ouro Preto as the capital of the state of Minas
Gerais, and Canudos, a fast-growing spontaneous settlement guided by messianic leader
Antonio Conselheiro in Bahia, was destroyed by the Brazilian army. Both the plan of
Belo Horizonte by engineer Aardo Reis and the Canudos war campaign reveal positivist
views of sanitation and circulation in vogue at that time.

Following that direction, the 1900s would be marked in Rio by the urban reformations
of Pereira Passos, with avenues being opened and slums being displaced while civic
buildings in French neoclassical style took its place (for example, in Teatro Nacional,
1906). In 1927 another plan by the French urbanist Alfred Agache would be the structure
for Rio’s main transformations of the first half of the century. Meanwhile, Sao Paulo
experimented an exhilarating growth brought about by the coffee-based economy that
provided new developments based on garden city ideas for the emergent middle class.
Around 1905 Victor Dubugras was designing railroad stations in the Art Nouveau style,
initiating what would be Sao Paulo’s cosmopolitan modernity.

Later, in the second decade of the century, a debate would arise regarding issues of
local identity versus international images with the arrival of Art Deco on the one hand
and the development of neo-Colonial styles on the other. The Deco tradition was manifest
in many of Brazil’s landmarks, such as the Cristo Redentor statue over Rio, the City Hall
in Belo Horizonte, and multiple buildings and viaducts in Sdo Paulo. On the other hand,
the neo-Colonial movement, led by José Mariano Filho, would battle against the
modernist avant-garde ideas during the whole of the 1920s and 1930s but would also be
fundamental to give Brazilian modernism its character by valuing the forms of 18th-
century baroque.

Until the 1920s, modernism had an impact only on some isolated painters and writers
who were influential within architectural developments. The event that marks the starting
point of Brazilian avant-garde is the Semana de Arte Moderna, a week of exhibitions,
lectures, and poetry declamation organized in Sado Paulo in 1922. From this period, we
can highlight the works of Oswald de Andrade on texts such as —_ and the young female
painters Anita Malfatti and Tarsila do Amaral. They attempted to resolve the apparently


opposing forces of abstract internationalism and the representation of local identities.
After the polemical introduction at the Semana, Brazilian avant-garde artists gradually
turned to the issue of adapting the avant-garde to Brazilian reality and “Brazilianess.” As
early as 1925, articles appeared in Sdo Paulo’s newspapers by Rino Levi and Gregory
Warchavchik, who were the first exponents of what contemporary historiography calls
“modern architecture in Brazil” (primarily derived from European traditions) to
differentiate it from “Brazilian modern architecture” (exemplified by Brazilian-derived
ideas and formal vocabularies). Rino Levi (Art Palacio Movie Theater, 1936) became an
exemplar of Brazilian modernism, whereas Warchavchik (House at Rua Itapolis, 1928)
would play an important role as Costa’s partner for a while and also as the first Latin
American delegate to the CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne).

In 1930, in what would be one of the key moments of Brazilian architecture, Lacio
Costa was named director of ENBA (National School of Beaux-Arts). As soon as he was
named, Costa began a radical reformation of the art and architecture curriculum based on
the Bauhaus pedagogy and Le Corbusier’s ideas in architecture. The strong reaction
against the changes led to Costa’s replacement 11 months later, but the ideas that he
installed flourished with a generation of students at that time: Oscar Niemeyer, Roberto
Burle Marx, Affonso Raidy, Carlos Moreira, Milton Roberto, Luis Nunes, and Henrique
Mindlin, among others. Until 1930 the ENBA still adopted the 19th-century academic
approach to architectural teaching, with a strong emphasis on classical figurative
drawing. This was changed in the 1930 curricular reformation, and this early generation
of Brazilian modern architects took advantage of both the strong domain of classical
drawing and the new architectural freedom of avant-garde techniques. After leaving the
ENBA, Costa went to work for the Ministry of Education and Culture on the organization
of SPHAN, the Brazilian Office for Conservation of Historic Monuments.

With the task of cataloging, protecting, and publicizing Brazilian historic and artistic
heritage, the Servigo do Patrim6nio Histérico e Artistico (SPHAN) was created in 1937.
Costa’s acumen played a major role in the articulation of Brazilian modern architecture,
stitching together the past and the future into a very effective concept of architecture.
Standing in defense of the | 8th-century baroque, not yet valued by modern critique and
diminished by the Beaux-Arts academia, Costa sought transitions and continuations
rather than ruptures and breaks; he thus conceived of modern architecture as a natural
continuation of the baroque style.

In 1936 Le Corbusier was invited as a supportive consultant for the team of architects
commissioned to design the new building for the Brazilian Ministry of Education and
Health (MES). The invitation of Le Corbusier served as a support for canceling the
previous competition, as the winning design was considered by the government to be
incompatible with the modern image that it was trying to establish. The MES building,
one of the first high-rises of the world following Le Corbusier’s five points, would
catalyze a whole generation of young architects and artists, with the murals by Candido
Portinari, sculptures by Bruno Giorgi, and gardens by Burle Marx, around the
architecture developed by Costa, Carlos Ledo, Jorge Moreira, and mainly Oscar
Niemeyer, inspired by Le Corbusier.

The years before and during World War II would also witness the spread
of modernist architects all around the country and the battles between

modernists and traditionalists in Rio. In

Santa Efigénia Viaduct, Sao Paulo,
Brazil (architects unknown)

© Eduardo Costa

Recife, Luis Nunes would direct the municipal building office and collaborate with
structural Joaquim Cardoso (Water Tower, 1937) and Saturnino N.Brito (Anatomical
Laboratory, 1940), and Burle Marx was redesigning the city’s public gardens. In Sado
Paulo, Rino Levi designed the Sedis Sapientiae building (1942), and Alvaro Vital Brasil
designed the Esther Building (1937). However, Rio de Janeiro was still the country’s
capital, and there, in addition to the Roberto Brothers ABI (1936) and Santos Dumont
Airport (1944), Atilio Correa Lima designed the Seaplane station (1940), and Niemeyer
designed a nursery (Obra do Berco, 1937) and his own house (1939) at Lagoa.

Meanwhile, a vigorous debate around architecture and national identity would turn
into many battles fought through competitions and commissions. The federal government
maintained a twofold take on architecture all the way through the 1930s, alternating
commissions between modernists and traditionalists. In 1939 a commission was done for
a hotel in the city of Ouro Preto, home of the most important baroque buildings in Brazil,
with SPHAN responsible for the project. Niemeyer’s modernist scheme modified by
Costa’s advice (adding a ceramic roof like the rest of the city and wooden trellises instead
of steel was accepted and built. With the Grande Hotel de Ouro Preto (1942), a
modernist design in the heart of the main historical city of Minas Gerais, the modernist
group demonstrated the possibility of blending modernity with tradition.

The decade would end with the first international exposure of Brazilian modernism
with the design for the Brazilian Pavilion at the 1939 New York World’s Fair. The
combination of Le Corbusian volumes with sensual curves caught the attention of the
architectural media, and just four years later the Museum of Modern Art in New York
mounted the “Brazil Builds” exhibition. The accompanying catalogue by Philip Goodwin
became the first text on Brazilian modern architecture to be published in English.


Goodwin's marriage of modernity and Brazilian heritage was further advanced by Costa
and would be the conceptual basis for many of the most successful Brazilian buildings
after the 1940s.

In 1941 Niemeyer was commissioned by the city’s mayor, Jucelino Kubitschek (who
would be the president who built Brasilia 15 years later) to design a series of buildings
around Pampulha’s artificial lake, in Belo Horizonte. Niemeyer’s designs of Capela da
Pampulha, Casa do Baile, Casino, and late Clube became the model for Brazilian
architectural modernism for decades. The Capela was revolutionary for breaking with the
Le Corbusian paradigm, with its walls and ceiling that were not “free” (or flexible) but
inseparable. Ceramic tiles cover its parabolic vaults, and a ceramic panel decorates the
rear wall. The Casino presents a free-form canopy supported by thin steel columns and
the continuous glass wall on the facade. Inside the cubic main volume, the ramp
dominates functionally, and the round concrete columns punctuate the rhythm of the
interior space. The impact of the Pampulha buildings was considerable, initially in Brazil
just after its completion in 1942 and then abroad. The international debate of the
following decade would embrace Brazilian architecture in its core, with Nikolaus Pevsner
labeling Pampulha as subversive work, Reyner Banham claiming it as the first national
style in modern architecture, and Gino Dorfles describing Niemeyer’s work as
neobaroque.

The architecture of the 1950s is still considered the golden years of Brazilian
modernism. Starting with Rino Levi designing the headquarters of the Brazilian Institute
of Architects (1949) in Sdo Paulo and Affonso Raidy designing the Museum of Modern
Art (1952) in Rio, the 1950s would also witness innumerable fascinating buildings by
Sergio Bernardes (House for Lota M. Soares and Elizabeth Bishop, 1952), Francisco
Bolonha (Maternity Hospital, 1951, in Cataguases and Kindergarten, 1952, in Vitoria),
Alvaro Vital Brasil (Banco da Lavoura, 1951, in Belo Horizonte), and Niemeyer
(Ibirapuera Pavilions, 1954), as well as the Burle Marx gardens. In a time of accelerating
industrialization and urbanization, the issue of housing was at the core of the 1950s
practice. The Pedregulho complex (1950) by Raidy, the Bristol apartments (1950) by
Costa, and the Kubitschek complex (1953) by Niemeyer in Belo Horizonte are the most
well known, but other, still little-known architects were laboring to improve housing
quality and quantity in government offices, such as Carmem Portinho at the PDF (Rio’s
office for public building). In the 1950s, a second generation of modernist architects
would emerge from the Rio-Sado Paulo axis including Acacio Gil Borsoi in Recife, Edgar
Graeff in Porto Alegre, and Eduardo Guimaraes and Sylvio de Vasconcelos in Belo
Horizonte, effectively extending the achievements of modern architecture to new
frontiers. However, the most important group, formed around the late 1950s, might be the
later-called Escola Paulista (Sio Paulo School). The group, formed around Jodo Batista
Villanova Artigas, would advocate for an open architecture in terms of content while
developing a unique aesthetic of exposed concrete, generous slabs, and rigorous
geometry. Among many extraordinary buildings are the School of Architecture (1967) at
the University of Sao Paulo and Morumbi Stadium (1969) by Artigas and the Brazilian
Pavilion (1970) at Osaka and the Junqueira House (1976) by Paulo Mendes da Rocha,
who would be of the major Brazilian architects of the late decades of the 20th century
with his designs for the Museu da Escultura (Sculpture Museum, 1986) and Pinacoteca
renovation (1995), both in Sao Paulo.


The golden years of Brazilian modernism led to the construction of Brasilia (1955—
60). During the presidential term of Juscelino Kubitschek, the idea of building a new
capital in the heartland was put forward, and the planning competition was won by Costa
in 1956, with major buildings by Niemeyer (Congress, Cathedral, Foreign Ministry, and
Presidential residence [Alvorada] and offices [Planalto], among many others). The new
capital was opened on 21 April 1960. The international reaction to Brasilia is well known
and ranges from the Alvorada columns being copied worldwide to a severe social
criticism of the city’s flaws. However, its construction would change fundamentally the
panorama of Brazilian modernism after that. In the geopolitical realm, the inland capital
induced a vector of penetration toward the backlands. On the symbolic level, the
buildings by Niemeyer (especially the Congress with its twin towers and inverted
spherical capes) would become the icons of Brazilian institutions. In terms of
architecture, Brasilia marks the climax of the modernist paradigm and the beginning of its
critique and revision that followed.

While Brasilia was under construction, Lina Bo Bardi (an Italian immigrant living in
Brazil since 1947) was completing her Museum of Modern Art (1957) in Sao Paulo. In
the early 1960s, Bardi worked in Salvador, where she renovated 17th-century buildings
and worked with popular art exhibitions in preparation for the construction of the
Museum of Art at that city. However, the military coup of 1964 aborted her plans and
those of many other architects. Without ever actually leaving the architectural scene, she
came back with the SESC-Pompéia (1987), a sports/cultural facility in Sao Paulo.

The 1970s, known in Brazil as the “economic miracle” years, experienced huge
housing projects financed by the National Housing Bank in which the control was with
the construction firms, marginalizing most architects to a secondary role. The military
regime was also responsible for the exile of exponent architects, such as Niemeyer,
Artigas, and Vasconcellos, repressing architecture schools that were a focus of cultural
and political discussion on the 1960s. Although the construction industry was busy with
megahousing projects, the more talented architects were revising the modernist dogmas
and receiving the early Postmodern ideas from Europe and the United States. The critique
of modernism carried out in Brazil during the 1970s is also associated with a demand for
regional solutions, a reaction against the hegemony of the Rio and Sao Paulo Schools.
Deep in the Amazon, Severiano Porto was experimenting with climatic and formal
solutions (Architect’s house, 1971; Silves hostel, 1979; Balbina’s environmental center,
1984), whereas in Salvador, Jodo Filgueiras Lima (State Administrative Center, 1973,
and several Sarah hospitals since the 1970s) and Francisco Assis Reis (Chesf building,
1978) were advancing the ideas of late modernism. Also under a late-modernist approach
were the buildings by Carlos E.Comas, Carlos Fayet in Porto Alegre (Centre de
Abastecimento, 1972), Luis Paulo Conde in Rio (Ewerton house, 1968, and UERJ [State
University] Complex, 1968), and Humberto Serpa and Marcus Vinicius Meyer in Belo
Horizonte (BDMG building, 1969).

Beyond the late modernism of the 1970s, a generation of young architects in Belo
Horizonte took Postmodernist ideas further away. Gravitating around magazine (a direct
reference to Niemeyer’s buildings at that same city), founded in 1979, the “Mineiros”
catalyzed the Postmodern/regionalist tendencies of the 1980s in Brazil. The Touristic
Support Center building (1982; called Rainha da Sucata) by Eolo Maia and Sylvio
Podesta in Belo Horizonte epitomizes their movement with its bright colors, rusted metal


surfaces, and plenty of formal quotations from the surroundings. The 1980s would then
have pluralism and regionalism as its axis, with an intense debate between proponents of
a continuation of late-modernist ideas and the defendants of Postmodern rupture. In 1991,
in a competition for the Brazilian Pavilion at the Sevilla Expo, this debate would reach its
peak. The first prize (never built) was awarded for a group of Paulistas (Angelo Bucci
and others); the runners-up were Eolo Maia and Joel Campolina, and a special award
(Paulo Leander) was given to the Mineiros. In Sdo Paulo, now the financial center of the
new Brazilian economy, Rui Othake designed several high-rise apartment buildings while
Gian F.Gasperini and Roberto Aflalo changed the face of Paulista Avenue with their
design for the Citibank building.

The last decade of the 20th century also saw the rise of a very talented generation of
architects in Recife galvanized by Fernando Montezuma (Camelédromo [street vendors
pavilion], 1994) and in Porto Alegre with Edson Mahfuz. In Rio de Janeiro, an extensive
project of urban design, public facilities, and renovation was put forward by Luis Paulo
Conde, first as the Municipal Secretary of Urbanism (1992-96) and then as mayor (1996—
2000). Rio Cidade (urban design of downtown areas) and Favela-bairro (improvements
and infrastructure at the shanty hills) are among the successful cases of good architecture
serving the public at the end of the century.

As the 20th century came to an end, Brazil showed a dynamic internal architectural
scene with almost 100 schools in 20 states, despite not participating much on the
international scene. That started to change in the late 1990s with the renewed interest in
Brazilian modernism being exhibited and discussed worldwide, and this should project its
20th-century accomplishments well into the third millennium.

FERNANDO LARA
Bo Bardi, Lina (Brazil); Brasilia, Brazil; Burle Marx, Roberto (Brazil);
Church of St. Francis of Assisi, Brazil; Costa, Lucio (Brazil); Guedes,
Joaquim (Brazil); Levi, Rino (Brazil); Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil);
Pampulha Buildings, Belo Horizonte, Brazil; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Sao
Paulo, Brazil

Further Reading

Broadbent, Geoffrey, “Brazil Still Builds: Vilanova Artigas and Affonso Eduardo
Reidy,” 37 (1998)
Bruand, Yves, Sado Paulo: Editora Perspectiva, 1981
Lemos, Carlos Alberto Cerqueira, Sao Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1979
Mindlin, Henrique E., New York: Reinhold, and London: Architectural Press, 1956
Segawa, Hugo, “The Essentials of Brazilian Modernism,” 32/33 (1994)
Segawa, Hugo, Sao Paulo: EDUSP, 1998
Underwood, David Kendrick, New York: Rizzoli, 1994
Xavier, Alberto (compiler), Sao Paulo: Associacao Brasileira de Ensino de
Arquitetura, 1987

BREUER, MARCEL 1902-81

Architect, United States

Marcel Breuer was a master of scale. His designs ranged from the human anatomical
scale of the chair to the domestic scale of his modern houses, the urban street scale of the
museum, and the monumental scale of major international commissions. To observe
these varied designs, Breuer’s Bauhaus steel tubular chair (1928); his own houses in
Lincoln, Massachusetts (1939), and New Canaan, Connecticut (1947); the Whitney
Museum of American Art (1966) in New York City; and the United Nations Educational,
Social and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Headquarters (1958) in Paris will serve as
excellent examples selected from his long career.

Breuer’s tubular steel cantilevered chair is a primary legacy of the Bauhaus, recalled
now in both its original and its ubiquitous copied forms. Breuer had come to the Bauhaus
to follow Walter Gropius’s belief that good design for mass production through the
machine would improve living conditions for the common man. It was here, in the highly
charged, creative atmosphere of prewar Germany, that Breuer first exhibited his talent,
advancing from student to Bauhaus master of the furniture design work-shop. The
machine imagery of the Bauhaus is evident in two ways in the Breuer Bauhaus chair:
first, it is a prototype for repetitive machine production, and, second, the materials of the
tubular steel chair replicate the materials of another type of machine: the bicycle, a
modernist icon.

Breuer further experimented with furniture, especially in bent plywood, producing his
successful Isokon chair (1935) for an advanced London design firm. Isokon Furniture
Company was really a rescue mission for Bauhaus refugees such as Breuer and Gropius,
affording them employment and exit visas from Nazi Germany. Breuer was a very
fortunate man to be helped early in his career by influential people such as Gropius and
J.C. Pritchard, Isokon’s founder. Pritchard supported Bauhaus refugees while they got on
their feet, offering design commissions as well as stipends and living quarters in Isokon
Flats, Hampstead, London. In return for Pritchard’s largesse, Breuer produced some of
the finest works to come out of the Isokon design line.
Gropius further aided Breuer when, after they both emigrated from Britain to the
United States, Gropius brought Breuer to Harvard University to teach in the revamped
design school and formed a working partnership with him as well. This led to their
collaboration on an architectural compound of modern houses in rural Lincoln,
Massachusetts: the Woods End Colony. Here, émigré Breuer built his first American
house design for himself and began a major thread of his career in inventive forms of
distinctly American domestic flavor. Domestic works of textural American wood and
fieldstone, with clean lines and openness, became Breuer’s first big success, as he
increasingly moved away from Gropius’s European white cubic architecture, eventually
conceiving his signature two-wing house plan.

Breuer’s Lincoln house is transitional, employing echoes of his earlier European
white-box roots together with his new American tactileness, and relates both to his
British Ganes Pavilion (1936) in Bristol and to Gropius’s work. Breuer’s American style
was fully developed by the time he built his later house for himself in New Canaan, a
simple statement of lightweight cantilevered construction, a wooden “crate” within


rolling landscape. It is interesting to note that the cantilever form, which would organize
this house and so much of Breuer’s later architectural work, was first used by him in
furniture design.

Breuer did not, however, confine himself to the domestic realm in which
he had become so adept. Having left Harvard, teaching, and Gropius, he
opened his own firm in New York City in 1946, winning important
commissions for urban architecture, the most significant of which was his
design for the

Aluminum City Terrace (Townhouse
33 out of 250), New Kensington,
Pennsylvania, designed by Marcel
Breuer and Walter Gropius (1941)

© Gottscho-Schleisner, Inc.
photographer/Library of Congress,
Prints and Photographs Division

Whitney Museum of American Art (1966) on Madison Avenue in New York City. This
highly unusual design has remained controversial since its inception and was nearly
effaced within a planned addition of a Postmodernist pastiche during the 1980s.

With this forceful building, Breuer broke with all expectations and sense of his former
domesticity, yet he did not lose the sense of scale dictated by the urban pedestrian street.
Breuer’s vision of the Whitney is very brave new world, very Brutalist. It is a rare
modern interpretation of the beauty of the sublime, the aesthetic of beauty heightened by
awe and fear; it hangs ominously over Madison Avenue, reversing the traditional solid-
void relationships of architecture, cantilevering its mass as a Breuer chair is structured.

Its rock-faced hardness and aesthetic contortions speak to the hardness of the urban place
and to the socially hard times of the America of its conception, the 1960s. Breuer’s
Whitney is a tough architecture—brutal but beautiful.

Breuer had by now moved into the international realm, which few architects reach,
with such commissions as the UNESCO Headquarters in Paris, here sharing the design
program with such international modern artists as Henry Moore, Alexander Calder, Jean
Arp, and Pablo Picasso. For this monumental multi-use edifice, Breuer employed his
sweeping Y-shaped plan in a sculptural concrete configuration. He hearkened back to his
early unbuilt design for a concrete civic center (1936) for London, setting his massive
tripartite building on Le Corbusian stilts. Although this work at first looks very
bureaucratic, especially in its setting within the La Militaire sector of Paris, its most
creative, intriguing feature—that it actually responds to the nearby landmark Eiffel
Tower—is not readily apparent. In plan UNESCO’s tripartite shape looks very like an
Eiffel Tower laid on its side. Because this relationship, although undeniable, can be
appreciated only in plan or by observation from the deck of the Eiffel Tower itself, one
wonders whether the relationship was intentional or unconsciously created by Breuer in
response to the Parisian site. In either case, it enriches the UNESCO design.

From the Bauhaus to New York to Paris, from the 1920s to the 1960s, Breuer created
modern form. Chair to house to public monument, throughout the entire scale of the built
environment, he responded to modern life. The aesthetics of Breuer have been endlessly
influential in defining that place we call the modern world.

LESLIE HUMM CORMIER
Bauhaus; Bauhaus, Dessau; Brutalism; Gropius House, Lincoln,

Massachusetts; Gropius, Walter (Germany)

Biography

Born in Pécs, Hungary, 21 May 1902; emigrated to the United States 1937; naturalized
1944. Attended the Allami Férediskola, Pécs 1912-20; studied at the Bauhaus, Weimar,
Germany 1920-24. Married (1) Martha Erps 1926; married (2) Constance Crocker
1940:2 children. Professor, carpentry and furniture design programs, Bauhaus, Weimar
1924-28; master of the Bauhaus, Weimar 1924 and Dessau 1925-28. Independent
architect and interior designer, Dessau 1925—28 and Berlin 1928-36; partnership with
F.R.S.Yorke, London 1936-37; professor, Harvard University School of Design,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 1937-46; collaborated with Walter Gropius, Cambridge
1937-41; private practice, Marcel Breuer and Associates, Cambridge 1941-46; moved
practice to New York 1946-76; member, National Council of Architectural Registration
Boards 1947; fellow, American Institute of Architects; member, National Institute of Arts
and Letters; honorary member, Association of Argentine Architects 1947; honorary
member, Association of Architects of Columbia 1947. Gold Medal, American Institute of
Architects 1968; Gold Medal, French Academy of Architecture 1976. Died in New York,
1 July 1981.

Selected Works

Prototype Steel Furniture and Interchangeable Cabinet Units, 1924-28

Isokon Laminated Furniture (with F.R.S. Yorke), England, 1936

Gane’s Exhibition Pavilion (with F.R.S. Yorke), Bristol, 1936

Civic Center of the Future (project with F.R.S. Yorke), London, 1936

Isokon Bar (with F.R.S. Yorke), London, 1937

Breuer House I, Lincoln, Massachusetts, 1939

Aluminum City Terrace housing complex, New Kensington, Pennsylvania (with
Walter Gropius), 1941

Breuer House II, New Canaan, Connecticut, 1947

Institute for Advanced Study of Housing, Princeton University (with R.F.Gatje), New
Jersey, 1957

UNESCO Headquarters (with Pier Luigi Nervi and Bernard Zehrfuss), Paris, 1958

IBM Research Center (with R.F.Gatje), Le Gaude, Var, France, 1961

Whitney Museum of American Art (with H.Smith), New York, 1966

Selected Publications

edited by Peter Blake, 1955
1962

Further Reading

Blake, Peter, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1949
Gatje, Robert F., § New York: Monacelli Press, 2000
Jordy, William H., “The Domestication of Modern,” in by Jordy, Garden City,
New York: Doubleday, 1972
Wilk, Christopher, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981
Wingler, Hans Maria, Bramsche: Gebr. Rasch, 1962; 2nd revised edition, as
Cologne: DuMont Schauberg, 1968; 2nd edition translated as translated by
Wolfgang Jabs and Basil Gilbert, edited by Joseph Stein, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press, and London: Cambridge Press, 1969; 3rd revised edition, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1976

BRICK

“A common, ordinary brick,” says Woody Harrelson, playing an architect in the movie
(1993), “wants to be something more than it is.” Harrelson proceeds to turn this
proposition into a metaphor for the human condition, something never envisioned by the
real architect who served as an inspiration for the movie’s monologue. It was Louis
I.Kahn (1903-74) who first posed a question in the early 1970s that has since attained
legendary status within architectural circles: “What do you want, brick?” The answer,
according to Kahn, is that brick wants to be an arch and not merely an in-fill or cladding
material with no structural role.

In fact, a key to understanding brick as a modern architectural material lies precisely
in its dual potential to be both structure and cladding. For the greater part of the history of
architecture, brick walls assumed both roles, simultaneously supporting floors and roof
while at the same time providing enclosure. It is only since the late 19th century that it
has become possible to separate those roles by creating an independent framework of
steel or reinforced concrete (structure) to which exterior brick may be attached
(cladding). In this case, the brick no longer supports the floors and roof, although its
appearance as cladding might well obscure this fundamental distinction.

From the Kahnian viewpoint, brick as mere cladding was inherently suspect.
However, other modernists were equally distrustful of brick as load-bearing structure, as
this seemed to negate the idea of the “free plan,” the independence of structural
framework from means of enclosure, and the opportunities for large glass areas. In fact,
an influential faction of early 20th-century modern architects and theorists eschewed the
use of brick in any form, associating it with the 19th-century cultural forces that they
were attempting to overcome. They lobbied instead for the 20th century’s revolutionary
new materials of construction: glass, steel, and reinforced concrete. Where construction
with brick walls was still found expedient within this context, a coat of plaster could
transform the deviant surface into something acceptably plain and neutral. As a of
traditional culture and pre-industrial technology, brick was an easy target. However,
brick’s traditional role as load-bearing structure was also legitimately challenged by the
need for greater heights and larger spans in the new commercial and industrial structures
of the 19th and 20th centuries and by the ascendancy of heterogeneous, layered exterior
wall systems that could accommodate air and vapor barriers, thermal insulation, and an
air space (cavity) to block the migration of water through exterior walls.

Nevertheless, brick was never rejected absolutely and was, on the contrary, often
found capable of embodying precisely the abstract formal values that helped define the
new modernist aesthetic. Even load-bearing brick buildings remained influential well into
the 20th century, acting as a kind of conservative moral datum of “honest” construction
(what the brick really “wanted to be”) opposed to some, but not all, modern tendencies.
Architects continued to use brick with enthusiasm and, like Frank Lloyd Wright (1867—
1959), boasted that in their hands the ordinary brick became “worth its weight in gold.”
Other practitioners, however, were less confident about the appropriateness of brick in


modern construction; for them, brick represented a kind of compromise—accepted with
various degrees of ambivalence—between the new culture, technology, and aesthetics of
the 20th century and those that preceded it. At the same time, brick itself was subject to
technological change, evidenced not only in the increased systemization of its
manufacture, begun in the late 12th century and culminating in the 19th century’s
relentless mechanization of all aspects of the brick-making process, but in the application
of Frederick Taylor’s theory of scientific management to bricklaying in the first decades
of the 20th century.

Brick was widely used throughout the 20th century, accommodated within virtually all
styles. The chronological survey that follows is therefore necessarily incomplete and
somewhat arbitrary. That being said, several key developments can be high-lighted,
starting with the period before World War I. Already, a number of trends can be
discerned in the late 19th century that continued to be played out well into the 20th. The
first can be illustrated by Daniel Burnham’s design for the Monadnock Building in
Chicago (1889) and H.P.Berlage’s Amsterdam Stock Exchange (1903), both of which
pointed the way toward a reinterpretation of brick informed by the modernist bias toward
simple, relatively unornamented surfaces, even when used in load-bearing wall
construction. A second, more complex tendency can be seen in the brick facade of Louis
Sullivan’s Wain-wright Building in St. Louis (1890), which, while functioning as
nonstructural cladding, was meant to express symbolically the “idea” of the steel
framework behind it. What resulted, though, was a certain ambiguity—some would call it
deceit—in which the actual construction of the building was severed from its outward
form.

A third trend derives from 19th-century brick-walled factory buildings characterized
by flat brick surfaces, functional massing, and the use—at least internally—of heavy
timber or cast-iron structural elements. In Hans Poelzig’s chemical plant at Luban (1911),
the asymmetric massing and unornamented surfaces were distinctly modern; in contrast,
the small, rectangular and arched window openings that punctuated the brick walls
evoked a premodern sensibility. On the other hand, the Fagus Werk factory in Alfeld-an-
der-Leine (1911) and the model factory, Werkbund exhibition, Cologne (1914), by
Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer—both brick-clad buildings—contained elements of
classical axiality in their massing while their innovative glass curtain walls, when
photographed from the proper perspective, gave the buildings a dynamic modern
appearance. An additional variation on this theme can be seen in Poelzig’s Upper Silesia
Tower in Posen (1911), where brick cladding is clearly expressed as nonstructural “in-
fill” within an actual structural frame exposed on the building’s surface. However, this
remained a minority position, in part because the exposure of an actual skeletal
framework, especially of steel, invites problems with corrosion, differential thermal
movement, water and air infiltration, and the continuity of thermal insulation. Instead, it
is Sullivan’s attitude valuing formal expression above “truth in construction” that informs
most brick architecture in the early 20th century. For example, many of Wright’s early
projects, including the Larkin Building in Buffalo (1904), the Robie House in Chicago
(1909), and the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo (1916), although nominally load-bearing brick
structures, were filled with hidden steel and concrete elements that allowed his formal
vision to be actualized.

Eigen Haard Housing complex,
designed by Michel de Klerk, Building
#3, corner

© Elisabeth A.Bakker-Johnson

Finally, a fourth trend combining the textural possibilities of brick-bonding patterns
with an interest in free-form massing and Romantic silhouette finds an analogue in
certain so-called Expressionist projects from the early 20th century: examples include
Michael de Klerk’s Eigen Haard and Piet Kramer’s De Dageraad housing estates in
Amsterdam (1917 and 1923, respectively), in which otherwise straightforward brick
facades are enlivened with curvilinear brick elements and decorative treatments.

Between the two world wars, brick was employed by a younger generation of
European modernists experimenting with new spatial concepts informed by notions of
Cartesian orthogonality and populated by interpenetrating planes and abstract cubic
masses. In particular, the early work of Mies van der Rohe, starting with his brick villa
project of 1923 and including his houses for Wolf (1925), Lange (1927), and Esters
(1927), as well as his monument to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg (1926),

attempted to reconcile these new formal attitudes with traditional brick-bearing wall
construction. However, more commonly, where load-bearing brick was present, it was
covered up with a smooth plaster finish, as in Erich Mendelsohn’s Einstein Tower in
Potsdam (1921), Gerrit Rietveld’s Schroder House in Utrecht (1924), and J.J.P.Oud’s
Kiefhook Housing Estate in Rotterdam (1930). In the United States, architects seemed
less interested in the ideological struggle between an evolving modernist aesthetic and the
use of traditional materials: brick was used as a primary cladding material in Raymond
Hood’s American Radiator (American Standard) Building (1923) and, combined with
stainless steel, in William Van Alen’s sumptuous Chrysler Building (1930).

After World War II, the use of brick, in both load-bearing walls and exterior cladding,
was revitalized by a new interest in raw materials of construction that could be expressed
in an aggressively straightforward manner. Of several such projects by Le Corbusier in
France and India, the most influential was his pair of houses, the Maisons Jaoul at
Neuilly-sur-Seine (1955), consisting of brick load-bearing walls supporting concrete-
covered—but brick-faced—Catalan vaults. This so-called Brutalist aesthetic, in which
brick was juxtaposed against deliberately exposed steel or concrete structural members,
reappeared in buildings such as the Langham House Development at Ham Common,
London, by James Stirling and James Gowan (1958) and in several projects by Louis
Kahn, including the Phillips Exeter Academy Library in Exeter, New Hampshire (1972),
and the Indian Institute of Management at Ahmedabad, India (1974). It is only with these
projects by Kahn that the traditional load-bearing brick arch was finally permitted to
enter the vocabulary of 20th-century architecture.

However, having been once let in, load-bearing brick, whether as wall, pier, or arch,
has had little further impact on 20th-century architecture. Instead, it is primarily as
nonstructural cladding that brick has made its presence felt, even within the Brutalist
oeuvre. Mies’s academic buildings at the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), designed
at the end of World War IL, used brick steel as cladding over the actual steel framework:
the brick appears ambiguously as both in-fill within, and foundation for, an elegantly
detailed—but nonstructural—grid of painted steel. Yet the fact that the brick (and steel)
could be seen on both the inside and the outside gave the construction a perverse kind of
integrity, and it served as a role model for numerous other buildings, including the self
consciously Brutalist Hunstanton School in Norfolk, England, designed by Alison and
Peter Smithson in 1949.

During this time, brick cladding became an accepted part of the modernist oeuvre,
representing a compromise in which the historically resonant surface qualities of brick
were fully integrated within the modernist vocabulary of unadorned orthogonal planes
and cubic mass, of articulated solid and void. Kahn’s influential Richards Medical
Research Building at the University of Pennsylvania (1961), with its expansive,
windowless brick surfaces, spawned numerous derivative works, including Ulrich
Franzen’s Agronomy Laboratory at Cornell University (1968) and Davis and Brody’s
Waterside Housing in New York City (1975). Earlier, Alvar Aalto, in his Baker House
Dormitory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1949) and Saynatsalo Town
Hall in Finland (1952), made of the brick surface an even more explicit medium for the
play of sensuality, imperfection, and historic reference.

Yet this compromise proved unstable. In the latter part of the 20th century, references
to tradition involving brick, however stylized or ironic, became less constrained by the


modernist formal aesthetic and more overtly rooted in historical precedent. A key
moment in the development of this Postmodernism was the Guild House in Philadelphia
(1963) by Robert Venturi. His axially positioned brick arch—nominally a load-bearing
form but here purposefully articulated as nonstructural cladding—acted like a pointing
to an intellectual attitude about history rather than as an attempt at some kind of
reconciliation. James Wines and his group, SITE, produced a series of architectural
projects beginning in the early 1970s that used various characteristics of brick walls as a
starting point for an ironic integration of sculpture and architecture. This attitude, as in
Venturi’s Guild House, addressed brick forms not only as construction systems—SITE’s
use of “peeling,” “notched,” and “crumbling” brick walls was directed more at brick as
cladding and at the recent banal history of big-box retail design—but also as the class-
stratified culture supported by such projects. That issues of class became intertwined with
the use of brick is illustrated as well by the so-called red-brick novelists in postwar
Britain, associated with the “red-brick” universities (not the older and elite “stone”
universities of Oxford and Cambridge), and the coincident phenomenon of Brutalist
buildings in which the deployment of brick was meant to invoke a kind of working-class
solidarity.

In a similar vein, American corporate Postmodern office skyscrapers of the 1980s
were generally clad with thin stone veneer rather than brick. Nevertheless, brick
continued to be widely used in Postmodern residences, schools, and related occupancies;
a building that typifies the genre is the condominium project on 70th Street, New York,
by Kohn Pedersen Fox (1987), in which a smooth, unadorned brick surface appears to
support stylized stone moldings and pediments that step back much like the New York
skyscrapers of the 1920s and 1930s. In Europe a far different Postmodernism emerged,
favoring a synthesis of classical and Platonic geometric elements within which the
Kahnian essence of brick—its weight, compressive strength, and solidity—were valued
and exploited. Aldo Rossi’s Burial Chapel in Giussano (1987) and Mario Botta’s design
for a private house in Vacallo (1989) serve as examples of this tendency.

Whether embraced, hidden, disowned, contrasted with more modern materials, or
coopted within a new aesthetic, brick has played an active role within the cultures of both
modern and Postmodern architecture. In contrast, so-called deconstructivist architecture
in the final decades of the 20th century has virtually ignored brick, reverting to the radical
modernist dogma in which abstract geometric surface and mass, the play of solid and
void, the iconography of machine and grid, and the “new” materials of glass, steel, and
concrete (or its nonstructural analogue, stucco) are once more combined, albeit in a self-
consciously distorted and fragmented way. Characteristically, where deconstructivist
brick appears most famously—in Peter Eisenman’s Wexner Center for the Visual Arts
(1990) in Columbus, Ohio—it is as a fragmented and stylized archaeological
reconstruction of an armory denoting the site’s past history rather than as “the building”
itself.

During the course of the 20th century, as traditional loadbearing forms of construction
encountered new structural and environmental systems, as well as new functional and
spatial needs, and as traditional architectural paradigms encountered new forms of
aesthetic expression, the answers to the question posed rhetorically by Kahn—‘What do
you want, brick?”—have shifted accordingly. That brick has continued to be commonly
employed as cladding in the face of competition from more modern and technologically


sophisticated materials is evidence enough that its nonstructural qualities—reasonable
cost, flexibility, durability, impact resistance, and visual appearance—continue to be
valued.
JONATHAN OCHSHORN

Berlage, Hendrik Petrus (Netherlands); Brutalism; Burnham, Daniel H.
(United States); De Klerk, Michel (Netherlands); Deconstructivism;
Eisenman, Peter (United States); Fagus Werk, Alfeld, Germany; Gropius,
Walter (Germany); Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago; Imperial
Hotel, Tokyo; Indian Institute of Management, Ahmadabad; Kahn, Louis
(United States); Kohn Pederson Fox (United States); Larkin Building,
Buffalo, New York; Mendelsohn, Erich (Germany, United States); Oud,
J.J.P. (Netherlands); Poelzig, Hans (Germany); Rietveld, Gerrit
(Netherlands); Robie House, Chicago; Smithson, Peter and Alison (Great
Britain); Sullivan, Louis (United States); Venturi, Robert (United States);
Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

The history of brick in 20th-century architecture can be pieced together from readings in
general architectural histories and in the accounts of individual architects, but sections or
chapters dealing specifically with brick are unusual. Notable exceptions include Giedion
and Patterson. For a good general reference work dealing with the production, properties,
and historical use of brick, see the work by Plumridge and Meulenkamp. Building
construction textbooks also contain information on bricks; an excellent chapter that
includes a short history of brick masonry can be found in Allen. The Brick Industry
Association publishes numerous books and technical articles on brick construction that
can be ordered from 11290 Commerce Park Drive, Reston, VA 22091. Alternatively,
refer to their web site listed below, especially their link to “technical notes.”

Allen, Edward, New York: Wiley, 1985; 3rd edition, 1999

Brick Industry Association <www.bia.org/>
Giedion, Sigfried, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, and
London: Oxford University Press, 1941; Sth edition, revised and enlarged, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1967
Patterson, Terry L, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1994
Plumridge, Andrew, and Wim Meulenkamp, New York: Abrams, 1993

BRITISH LIBRARY, LONDON

Designed by Colin St. John Wilson; completed 1998 London, England

The British Library is arguably the most significant and controversial 20th-century
public building in London, equal in importance to Sir Williams Chambers’s Somerset
House in the 18th century and Charles Barry and A.W.N.Pugin’s Houses of Parliament in
the 19th century, and the largest public building commissioned in the 20th century. In
terms of its centrality as an institution, urbanistic visibility and impact, cost (£511
million, contrasted with £400 million for Norman Foster’s Stansted Airport Outside
London, and £35.5 million for the Sainsbury Wing of the National Gallery, London,
1990), size, length of gestation and realization, programmatic complexity, and
architectural uniqueness, the British Library has no contemporary rivals. Its designer, the
erudite Colin St. John Wilson (who earned a knighthood on its completion) enjoys a
professional history non-pareil in modern Britain, comparable only to those 19th-century
Beaux-Arts laureates who devoted entire careers to executing one or two major official
buildings, or to his noble forebear, Sir John Soane, who labored over the Bank of
England from 1788 to 1831 (although, unlike that vanished monument, destroyed in
1922, the British Library is likely to endure for several centuries).

Until 1998 the name of the British Library was synonymous with the British Museum,
where it had resided since 1785; first in Montague House and after 1826 in Robert
Smirke’s colonnaded Greek Revival stronghold. From 1857 scholars perused books in the
beloved round reading room surrounded by book stacks constructed by Sidney Smirke in
the open courtyard of the museum under a ferro-vitreous dome. Exponential growth of
the collection and readership led, in 1951, to a proposal for expansion. In 1962 Sir Leslie
Martin (1908-2000) and his younger colleague, Colin Wilson (who by 1964 was solely in
charge) were commissioned to design a new wing, adjacent to the existing museum
building, which would be part of a mixed development of commercial, residential, and
institutional uses.

Over the next 12 years, two different schemes were thoroughly worked out by Wilson
for the Bloomsbury site, but the developing Preservationist movement demanded a
different location. Furthermore, the merger in 1972 of the British Museum library with
the National Science library necessitated a larger site. In 1973 the government acquired
nine acres next to St. Pancras Station, for a completely independent structure. Over the
next 25 years, Wilson and his partners, including his wife, library expert M.J.Long
(1939-), grappled with shifting governments, altered requirements, surly bureaucrats,
inflation, tight budgets, fickle architectural fashion, transformations in information
technology, and fallible contractors, to bring to fruition a great library that, in the words
of its architect, “embodies and protects the freedom and diversity of the human spirit in a
way that borders on the sacred.”

The relocation of the British Library was advantageous for many reasons.
Not only did it allow for a more capacious building that would not be

crammed onto an inadequate site (integral to the design was the notion of


expansion; only the first phase of a three-phase program has been erected),
but it represented a move to a part of London that, while more mercantile
and industrial than Bloomsbury, has a great future as an international
gateway, as it will provide a second terminus for cross-channel transit and
is the hub of several rail and underground lines. Fortunate too is its
proximity to St. Pancras Chambers (1878), now undergoing extensive
restoration. Sir George Gilbert, Scott’s Gothic Revival station and hotel,
completed in 1878 (also fiercely criticized in its time), is a more
sympathetic neighbor than the solemn stone museum, given Wilson’s
preference for the English Free style of the mid- and late 19th century over
the neoclassical movement that preceded it. Both ensembles are
multipurpose and contain very large spaces as well as more intimate
rooms; both draw passersby toward them by inflecting away from the
street; both have dramatic contrasts of vertical and horizontal volumes (a
slender clock tower on the library gestures to the bustling silhouette of St.
Pancras); and both are

British Library, London, designed by
Colin St. John Wilson (1998)

© The British Library, London

polychromatic (the pinkish-red brick used in the British Library comes from the same
Leicestershire source as that chosen by Scott), and in each case details are painted in

contrasting hues. Further, the majestic train sheds behind the station, by engineers Ordish
and Barlow, anticipate the tremendous spans encountered in the library.

The library serves a diverse assortment of functions and audiences: it is an urban
stage, a forum, an art gallery, and a repository of knowledge. The generous plaza
provides an inviting oasis within a dense quarter of the city and caters to the casua
passerby as well as the bibliophile through impressive sculptures, generous seating, and
an outdoor coffee shop; it also gives access to a conference center with auditorium, which
can be entered independently when the main building is closed. Within the library, the
public is immediately welcomed; the information desk and cloakrooms on the ground and
lower levels and the cafeteria restaurants on the second and third floors are readily visible
and accessible. To the left are the bookshop and a two-story exhibition area, properly
protected from daylight, where rare manuscripts and educational materials are on display.
On the fourth floor, the Friends’ room leads to an ample landscaped terrace that
overlooks the urban scene to the northeast. Although the sections show a complicated
matrix of interlocking spaces, clear circulation patterns enable visitors to swiftly reach
different destinations.

The reading rooms are flooded with inspirational, carefully controlled natural light, as
is the main reception hall, which soars through the full height of the building and is the
hinge between the humanities wing on the northwest and the science wing to the east.
Those seeking information on technical subjects, where journals, ephemera, and
electronic media are the rule, frequent the five reading rooms devoted to science. Tables
are arranged around the perimeter and daylight enters through side windows; here, the
reference materials are immediately available to readers, as that is the way most such
researchers operate. The two humanities reading rooms, endowed with clerestories and
skylights that bounce natural light off curved reflector walls, vary in proportion as well,
allowing different temperaments to choose their preferred niches, open or intimate,
central or peripheral. There are smaller enclosures for maps, manuscripts, and rare books
and music. The books are stored in environmentally monitored levels below ground
(additional volumes are stored off-site); the automated catalog and mechanized delivery
make retrieval swift and efficient.

Wilson’s own scholarly habits have sensitized him to the comfort of the researchers.
The variety in the size, shape, and illumi-nation of the spaces counters potential reader
fatigue and contributes a sense of serenity and well-being that embraces both patrons and
staff. Custom-designed furniture of wood and leather and carefully placed, beautifully
detailed lamps and fittings provide a zone of concentration within the grander reaches of
the reading rooms.

Wilson’s credo that architectural form must derive from thoughtful attention to
program and that it must be humane and inclusive means that the British Library presents
no monolithic image to be captured in a single photograph. Rather, the building can be
appreciated only over time by a moving and involved observer/user. This is not to say
that Wilson overlooks the beauty inherent in the striking form or in materials that appeal
to touch and hearing as well as sight. Besides the typical concrete, brick, and glass, the
palette includes Purbeck stone, travertine, bronze, brass, leather, terra-cotta, glazed tile,
luscious carpeting, American oak, African teak, and steel painted red and green; as one
moves from public to private areas, the materials become softer and more sensual. The
aesthetic heart of the building, a literal tour de force, is the six-story glass and bronze box


that houses the King’s Library, George III’s collection of rare books, donated to the
nation by George IV. The tower appears to arise from the watery depths beneath London,
thanks to the surrounding softly lighted and reflective “moat” of polished stone. A close
friend of many British artists, Wilson made certain that relevant art was included from
the start, such as the tapestry by R.B. Kitaj, the colossal sculptural transcription of
William Blake’s Newton by Eduardo Paolozzi, the bronze-cast typographic entrance
gates by David Kindersley, and the numerous busts, including, since 1999, one of the
architect himself, by Celia Scott.

Committed to “the other tradition” of modern architecture, Wilson pays subtle homage
in his masterwork to revered predecessors, especially Alvar Aalto and Hans Scharoun,
and there are discreet references to Frank Lloyd Wright, Sigurd Lewerentz, Le Corbusier,
Louis Kahn, James Stirling, H.P.Berlage, and Gunnar Asplund. However, this is no
Postmodern pastiche; rather, Wilson has assimilated the lessons of those masters to forge
an unmistakably personal synthesis that serves London urbanistically, aesthetically, and
programmatically in its own unique way, thoughtfully designed with its users’ comfort
and convenience in mind no less than producing an atmosphere conducive to scholarship,
contemplation, and general learning combined with sensual pleasure and intellectual
enjoyment.

HELEN SEARING
Foster, Norman (Great Britain); Library; Sainsbury Wing, National

Gallery, London

Further Reading

Caygill, Marjorie, and Christopher Date, | London: British Museum Press, 1999
Frampton, Kenneth, R.B.Kitaj, and Martin Richardson, London: Royal Institute of
British Architects, 1997
Harris, Philip Rowland, London: British Library, 1979; corrected edition, 1986
Jones, Peter Blundell, “Speaking Volumes,” (June 1998)

Wilson, Colin St. John, London: British Library, 1998
Wilson, Colin St. John, London: Academy Editions, 1995

BROADACRE CITY 1930-35

Project (unbuilt) by Frank Lloyd Wright

Following his innovative Prairie houses of the previous decades, Broadacre City
permitted Frank Lloyd Wright to pursue the subject of a new American urbanism. The
opportunity for this remarkable plan was provided initially by an invitation to present the
1930 Kahn Lectures at Princeton University. After a decade of personal trials and
professional inactivity and with the economic depression increasingly pressing, Wright
knew that these lectures could provide an opportunity for regeneration. In those sections

devoted to the city, he presented no specific layout or architectural parts. Instead, he
negatively exposed the physical and social state of present cities; they were ugly,
congested, dirty, badly administered, and an economic disaster. Wright’s solutions were,
however, mired in emotion mixed by awkwardly unclear language. Yet the vision of
Broadacre City was described in all but name. His comments match those in his
autobiography, written at the same time and for the same reason.

For the autobiography, Wright wrote a concluding section about Broadacre, but the
publisher rejected it. Wright then had it produced as a pamphlet titled . The first half
contained philosophical reasons for change and an accounting of present ills, organized
under five headings: economic (drawn from the analytical and curative ideas of Henry
George); suppression of human individuality; urban concentrations and the inhuman
vertical city; the failure to embrace modern resources (for example, telecommunications,
mechanical systems, and new building materials); and chaotic automobile traffic.

The last half of | offered some rather inexact proposals for rectification, all to be
activated by adhering to George’s social and economic observations and promotion of the
individual as the dominant factor in opposition to collectivism and the dominating
authorities of government and church. If causes and effects were properly understood and
cures attended, a fresh morality and new urban and rural space would follow, joined by a
new aesthetic, Broadacre City.

An article in briefly outlined some of Wright’s thoughts from _. Illustrated with a
fuzzy aerial view sketched in charcoal (not by Wright), it showed roads, major highways,
and a few isolated buildings on a rather desolate landscape. The text indicated some
determinants for Broadacre, including “plane-stations” and the use of highways for “take
off.” Wright did not mention how his city might be physically laid out, but one detail to
reappear was that “farm units and factories that produce [?] are within a ten mile radius...
of each market and within walking distance of home and the workers.” That radius fit the
location of “plane-stations” every 20 miles.

The published an article in 1932 about Le Corbusier’s architectonic
Ville Radieuse. Many readers were aware of Wright’s antagonism toward
what he saw as the growing hegemonic influence of Europe’s socialistic
modernism. Wright followed the Le Corbusier piece with an article titled
“Broadacre City: An Architect’s Vision,” in which he again attacked
centrally clustered skyscrapers (places of both work and home, he
reminded) as foolish and unnatural and said that villages harmoniously

close to the land were preferred: “Ruralism as distinguished from ”


Broadacre City (1930-35)

Map of a possible regional layout incorporating Broadacre villages to
an imprecise ca. 20 mile grid. Not to scale.

As extrapolated from F.L. Wright, 2nd edition, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1945.

Broadacre City remained a verbal, nontectonic concept until November 1934, when Tom
Maloney in New York City arranged to exhibit a model of a possible city. Wright
prepared a plan in late 1934 intended to accommodate about 4,000 people, and this plan
was published the following year. This served as the basis of plans prepared in 1945 and
1958. It was a suggestive layout for an imaginary site, perhaps typical, realizing that each
actual city/village would respond to its unique physical environment. A 12-foot-square
model, large display panels with illustrations and text, and a number of models of
possible buildings were mounted at Rockefeller Center in April-May 1935 and then at
Madison, Wisconsin; in Pittsburgh; and at the Corcoran Gallery in Washington, D.C.

The organizational device of a cruciform derived from a square gave the plan an
obvious coherence. Defined by roads and functional zones, the cruciform was used as
spatial geometry. The smallest element was a rectangular acre, but the design itself was
organized by a square composed of 40 (8 by 5) acres, such as that for the circular
stadium, or two squares at area 2 or four squares at area 4.

Housing was the heart of Broadacre—‘Minimum of one acre to the family’—and
constituted the large central square with schools at the center. Therefore, tall buildings


(including apartments) were not clustered but rather were dispersed on the periphery.
Other major areas included arts, recreational facilities, and county administration located
at A; markets, other recreations, and little farms at B; orchards and “small” industry at C;
and housing and higher education (and a cemetery) at D. In the cruciform’s corners were
nonfarm (“luxurious”) housing at and “games” and other administration at Juxtaposed
to regional rail lines and a raised four-lane highway (with storage underneath) were
distribution activities related to commerce, manufacturing, and industry, at g, C, and
respectively.

Generally, the Broadacre concept was one of self-sustaining communities surrounded
by nature preserves and rural agriculture, each linked regionally by transport systems.
Predecessors included Arturo Soria y Mata’s Linear City (1882 and later), Ebenezer
Howard’s Garden City (1898 and later), and William Drummond’s Neighborhood Unit
(1913). More in line with American sensibilities was Frederick Law Olmsted’s plan
(1868 and later, with Calvert Vaux) for Riverside, Illinois, a place known and admired by
Wright, as were Olmsted’s views about the city (it need not be synonymous with “an
unhealthy density of population”), about house and home (“the advantages of
‘civilization’ were perhaps best realized in suburban neighborhoods”), and on Nature
ideally typified by landscape and private gardens.

Although Wright had been influenced by writers, nonconformists, and philosophers
ranging from Ralph Waldo Emerson to Thorsten Veblen, the practical Henry Ford was
the immediate influence on Wright’s ideas for Broadacre. The two men agreed that such
innovations as the automobile, the airplane, and the radio were potent indicators of
freedom, capable of freeing up time from work and creating a new kind of social space.
To Wright, Ford epitomized a properly administered capitalism, American pragmatism,
gumption, verve, and a means to social change.

In 1918 Ford had said, “I am a farmer.... I want to see every acre of the earth’s surface
covered with little farms with happy, contented people living on them,” and close to little
markets. In 1919 he had said, “Plainly...the ultimate solution will be the abolition of the
City.... We shall solve the City problem by leaving the City.” Recognized as a
pragmatist, Ford always put theory into practice and weighed the results. He proposed
that regional car and tractor parts “manufacturing” plants be “within easy reach of
farming districts,” a series of village industries. One energetically pursued plan was the
construction of a large scheme at Muscle Shoals on the Tennessee River, but that private
enterprise was rejected by the federal government. In 1932 President Roosevelt
announced a tax-supported program for the multipurpose development of the Tennessee
Valley. It was similar to Ford’s proposal, only more comprehensive and considerably
larger. Ford’s idea of village industries was reiterated in May 1932, also in the it
followed Wright’s article on Broadacre.


Broadacre City (1930-35)

A Broadacre City layout as a possible
county seat beside a highway. The
large central square is for suburban
housing with educational facilities at
the center. Not to scale. As
extrapolated from. F.L. Wright,

(2nd ed.), University of Chicago Press,
1945.

Wright was clear about Ford’s influence, noting that Muscle Shoals would have
decentralized industry and given “every man a few acres of ground.” When Wright
introduced Broadacre City in 1932 in _ he titled it “Today... Tomorrow.” Ford’s book
(1926) described the integration of industry and agriculture. It reads as a primer for
Wright’s ideas on modern villages, the work ethic, unionism, effectiveness and
productivity, and much more, but not economics. Wright did not favor the plutocratic
impulse of American capitalism.

Inspired by Ford, Walter V.Davidson offered a practical application, commissioning
Wright in late 1931 to design prefabricated sheet-metal farm buildings composed of a

house separated by an airlock from a composite farm facility to be called a“Little Farms
Unit.” Davidson also asked for the design of “Wayside Markets” where the produce of
little farms—and from elsewhere—would be available at roadside. Made possible by
inexpensive cars, the idea pre-dates the modern shopping center. A service, social, and
administrative center was to be a “Little-Farms” village, laid out by Wright to contain
many normal city functions. Nothing came of these commissions, but they preceded or
paralleled Wright’s comments later in 1932 and predicted aspects of the 1934-35 plan
and related text.

The Broadacre City concept was meant to reinforce, by reinterpretation, the
Jeffersonian tradition of a rural society sustained by Emersonian virtues and to encourage
returning to a democratically endowed village life in modern geometric form and
functional character. Broadacre was to be scattered about the landscape, integrated “along
the horizontal lines” of highway and rail, with people free of capital gains tax but owning
“utilities and government” and a right to “fair means of subsistence” from “their own
ground,” laboratory, or “common offices.” However, as historian George Collins
correctly observed, in the 1930s “the world was not electrified by Wright’s agrarianism.”

Broadacre City is not a theory. It does not contain a body of ideas or a set of terms that
can be rationally measured—a treatise, yes, but not a utopia, nor was it conceived as
such. Lyman Sargent’s reasonable specification (in 1988) is that a utopia must
describe “fairly completely an imaginary society,” a nowhere. Therefore, Broadacre is
not included in his compendium. As the last radical reaction to the horrors (as Wright saw
the situation) imposed on cities in the 19th century by a rapacious process of
centralization, Broadacre City is a provocative decentralist proposition that—if faintly—
still teases urbanists.

DONALD LESLIE JOHNSON

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Ville Radieuse (c.
1930), Le Corbosier; Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

Wright’s arguments in the 1930s are best expressed in several of his essays (1931; March
and May 1932; April and July 1935) and in his. Brownell was committed to small
town participatory democracy, and he and Wright collaborated on—but thankfully
Brownell wrote—the section on Broadacre City in the work they coauthored. The most
valuable evaluations are Collins, Grabow, Ciucci, Alofsin, Johnson (1990), Johnson
(2000), and Zellner. Sergeant relates Broad-acres to Wright’s residential commissions,
1932-59,
Alexander, Stephen, “Frank Lloyd Wright’s Utopia,” 15 (June 1935)
Alofsin, Anthony A., “Broadacre City: The Reception of a Modernist Vision, 1932—
1988,” 5 (1989)
Brownell, Baker, and Frank Lloyd Wright, | New York and London: Harper, 1937
Ciucci, Giorgio, “The City in Agrarian Ideology and Frank Lloyd Wright: Origins and
Development of Broadacres,” in by Giorgio Ciucci et al., translated by Barbara
Luigia La Penta, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1979; London: Granada, 1980

Collins, George R., “Broadacre City: Wright’s Utopia Reconsidered,” in New
York: Columbia University Press, 1963
De Long, David G. (editor), Weil am Rhein, Germany: Vitra Design, and Milan:
Skira, 1998
Fishman, Robert, New York: Basic Books, 1977
Ford, Henry, Garden City, New York: Garden City Publishing, 1926; reprint,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Productivity Press, 1988
Grabow, Stephen, “Frank Lloyd Wright and the American City—The Broadacres
Debate,” 43 (April 1977)

Herbert, Gilbert, “The Organic Analogy in Town Planning,” 49 (August 1983)
Hubbard, Preston J., Nashville, Tennessee: Vanderbilt University Press, 1961
Johnson, Donald Leslie, “Broadacres Geometry: 1934-35,” 5 (Summer 1988)
Johnson, Donald Leslie, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990
Johnson, Donald Leslie, 2000
Schapiro, Meyer, “Architect’s Utopia,” 4 (March 1938)

Sergeant, John, New York: Whitey Library of Design, 1976
Wright, Frank Lloyd, “The City: Lecture 6,” in Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press, and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1931; reprint, Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1987
Wright, Frank Lloyd, “Broadacre City: An Architect’s Vision,” | (20 March 1932)
Wright, Frank Lloyd, “Today...Tomorrow,” 141 (May 1932)

Wright, Frank Lloyd, | New York: Payson, 1932; 4th edition, as New York:
Horizon, 1969
Wright, Frank Lloyd, New York: Longmans Green, 1932
Wright, Frank Lloyd, “Broadacre City: A New Community Plan,” 77 (April 1935)
Wright, Frank Lloyd, “Freedom Based on Form,” 16 (July 1935)

Wright, Frank Lloyd, 5 vols., edited by Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer, New York: Rizzoli,
and Scottsdale, Arizona: Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, 1992; see especially vol. 2,

1992
Zellner, Peter, “‘The Big City Is No Longer Modern,” (1998-99)

BRUSSELS, BELGIUM

Brussels, the capital of Belgium, played a vital role in the history of modern architecture
at the turn of the century. Since 1890 a group of young architects such as Victor Horta
(1861-1947), Paul Hankar (1861-1901), O. van Rijselberghe (1855-1929), and Henri
van de Velde (1863-1957), to name just a few, were essential in creating a new art: the
Art Nouveau. Versatile in many disciplines, their buildings would be designed into the
finest detail encompassing building facades, interior spaces, decorative structures,
furniture, wallpaper designs, doorknobs, and sometimes even the dress for the hostess.
This aesthetic quest in search for perfect harmony would dominate the avant-garde
architecture until the eve of World War I.

During the movements with more vigor and amplitude promoted a rationalization of
the building process. In order to solve the problems of Brussels’s overcrowded inner-city
area, garden cities were developed in its suburbs. Notorious examples are the Cité
Moderne (1923, St.-Agatha-Berchem) by Victor Bourgeois (1897-1962), the Kapelleveld
(1926, St.Lambrechts-Woluwe) by Huibrecht Hoste (1881-1957), and Le Logis (1927,
Boisfort/Bosvoorde) by Jean-Jules Eggericx (1884-1963) and Louis van der Swaelmen
(1883-1929).

Besides these collective habitations, these avant-garde architects also experimented
with individual residences. Henri van de Velde’s house in Tervuren (1928), Hoste’s
bourgeois house in Woluwe St. Pierre (1932) and by L.H.De Koninck’s (1896-1984)
Dotremont house in Uccle (1932) illustrate how, once liberated from traditional
construction methods, their technical virtuosity reached a most refined plastic expression.

The designs for public buildings during that period were mainly experimentation

grounds with the new material rein-forced concrete and complex building programs.
Horta’s Palais des Beaux-Arts (1928) has both classical and Art Deco stylistic features
and is built in reinforced concrete. The complicated plan reveals the architect’s primary
concern, namely, to accommodate a complex building program on an irregular sloping
site. The Institut Bordet (1934) by Gaston Brunfaut (1899-) and Stanislas Jansinsky
(1901-), with its white-colored balconies, form an objective expression of its hospital
function. And the Sanatorium of Tombeek (1935) by Maxime Brunfaut (1909-)
illustrates how by the end of the 1930s, architecture had become truly functional.
During the years following World War II, a succession of different architectural
tendencies would leave their undeniable mark on the urban landscape. The North-South
connection, a master plan developed back in the 19th century, took until 1945 to be
completed. This urban intervention longitudinally dissected the city and left a whole area
that needed to be redeveloped. A variety of public buildings in a number of styles were
erected, such as the new colossal National Bank building (1945) by M. Van Goethem, the
Kunstberg/Mont des Arts (1947) by J.Ghobert, the State Administrative Center (1955) by
the group Alpha (H.Kuyck, M.Lambrichts, G.Riguier), and the Central Station (1952)
designed by Horta and completed under M. Brunfaut.

Housing programs, both individual and collective ones, remained the most important
architectural tasks during this post-war period. Villas, with facades in noble materials,
such as natural French stone, adorned Brussels’s most prominent boulevards leading to
suburbs such as Tervueren and Uccle/Ukkel. Few of these buildings have a modern
character. Exceptions are the residences in Uccle/Ukkel (1954) by L.J.Boucher (1929-),
J.P.Blondel (1924—-), and O.Filippone (1927—). Row houses, the most common type of
townhouses in Brussels, formed continuous street elevations in new neighborhoods such
as Evere, Koekelberg, and Woluwe. Awarded the Van de Ven Prize for architecture in
1954, E.Delatte’s (1910—) design for his own house sets the standard: a garage and entry
hall on the ground level, daytime spaces on the first floor, nighttime spaces on the second
floor, and a brick facade. Apartment buildings were an attempt to change the monotony
of this typology. Noteworthy examples are the apartment buildings (1949) by Josse
Franssen in Schaarbeek, the duplex apartments in the high-rise tower (1954) by W.Van
der Meeren in Evere, and the Model City on the Heysel/ Heizel (1958) by R.Braem,
Coolens, Panis, and Van Doosselaere and the firms L’Equerre and Structures. The latter


created an entirely new, autonomous, harmonious, and lively neighborhood in close
travel distance to downtown.

Whereas before World War II, modernism would be generated in Europe and
emulated in the United States; after World War II, Europe borrowed ideas from America
to further develop its cities. Public buildings such as the offices of the Prévoyance
Sociale (PS), designed in 1957 by H.Van Kuyck (1902-), introduced the American
technique of the curtain wall. The Corporate Headquarters Offices of the Bank Lambert
(1965) were designed by Gordon Bunshaft (1909-90), a partner of Skidmore, Owings
and Merrill. Although for the latter this project was merely an intermediate step in an
evolving typology, for Brussels it represented a primer with its freestanding pillars that
support the cross-shaped prefabricated concrete elements of the elevation. This
procedure, which alleviated multiple shortcomings of the curtain wall, has been emulated
in many projects. An example is the Glaverbel office building (1967, Watermael-
Boisforts/ Watermaal-Bosvoorde) by R.Braem, P.Gullisen, AJacqmain (1921—), and
V.Mulpas, with its perfect circular plan and its elevation of discrete blue-stone slabs
attached to consoles in reinforced concrete. By the end of the 1960s, Brussels, with its
office towers, curtain walls, flat roofs, and freestanding columns, had developed after the
American model.

During the 1970s and 1980s, Belgian architecture freed itself from the doctrines of the
International Style and redirected its attention to its historical architectural and urban
heritage. At first various retro styles, such as neoecclecticism, neo-Art Nouveau and neo-
Art Deco, were rekindled; yet they did not, besides some ersatz products, make any
valuable contributions. The Belgian capital in search for its own identity did not find a
new architectural style. Noteworthy for the period are some remarkable architectural and
urban rehabilitation projects. The beautiful Salon du Concert Noble designed by
H.Beyaert in the 19thh century became an integral part of a new office building. And in
1983, it was decided that the new Museum of Modern Art (R.Bastin, L.Beeck) at the
Place Royale/Koningsplein had to be built completely below ground around a central
courtyard to minimally impact this historically significant urban context.

The last decade of the century is marked by a rekindled interest in qualitative
architecture. Typical for the 1990s is the work of H.Daem and P.Robberecht (1950—)
whose minimalist architecture are virtually invisible interventions in existing situations in
order to celebrate a work of art or a significant restored building element. In the Hufkens
gallery (1992), for example, the classical facade was carefully restored while the body of
the house was remodeled into exhibit spaces. The back elevation, with its free-form
composition contrasting open versus closed parts, is incontestably modern. It is
furthermore continued in the roof where it provides idiosyncratic light wells that, in
reference to V.Horta’s nearby townhouses, help to illuminate the otherwise dark interior
spaces.

Exemplary public buildings of the early 1990s are the projects by Ph. Samyn (1948-)
and Partners. Their architecture may be characterized as contemporary high-tech
executions of classical spatial compositions. His Brussimmo Office Building (1993),
erected in the Leopold district where most of the European institutes have their
headquarters, introduced the theme of the double skin. Consisting of two layers, it leaves
a void for easy maintenance, to locate stairs, and to integrate the mechanical systems. By


concentrating all secondary circulation and mechanical systems along the building’s
perimeter, a flexible plan is created.

Probably the most impressive building in the same area is the European Parliament
(1998) by M.Bouquillon, J.van Pottelsberghe de La Potterie, and G.Maes. Whereas its
spatial composition, with elliptic plan and central hall with vaulted ceiling, derives from
classical sources, its materials and details are undeniably modern and executed with state-
of-the-art technologies. Most important, it forms a new landmark for Brussels and
symbolizes the city’s new role as capital of the European community.

HENDRIKA BUELINCKX
Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Expo °58, Brussels; Bunshaft, Gordon (United
States); Horta, Victor (Belgium); L’In-novation Department Store,

Brussels; Palais Stoclet, Brussels; van de Velde, Henri (Belgium)

Further Reading

Bekaert, Geert, Tielt, Belgium: Lannoo, 1995; 2nd edition, as translated by
Ferdinand du Bois, 1995
Bontridder, Albert, | Antwerp, Belgium: Hélios, 1963
De Kooning, Mil (editor), Ghent, Belgium: Ghent University Press, 1999
Dubois, Marc, Basel, Switzerland, and Boston: Birkhauser, 1999
Jacobs, Steven, Ghent, Belgium: Ludion Press, 1998
Puttemans, Pierre, Brussels: Vokaer, 1974
Strauven, Francis, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: CRA Unite Architecture, 1981
Van Bergeijk, Herman, and Otakar Macel, Basel, Switzerland, and Boston:
Birkhauser, 1998; as translated by Graham Broadribb

BRUTALISM

Brutalism (also called New Brutalism), narrowly defined, was the term used to describe
the theory, ideas, and practice of a small number of young architects in Great Britain
from 1950 to 1960. Broadly conceived, Brutalism came to describe an internationa.
approach to architecture that reflected social ideals, industrial and vernacular means, and
humane goals.

Given the exigencies of building in Europe in the years immediately following World
War II, namely, limited resources and unlimited demand, it was no surprise that the new
generation of postwar architects saw before them not merely opportunity but the
challenge to respond to circumstances that seemed unprecedented in European history.
After World War I, architects seemed to approach the task of rebuilding in Europe with
revolutionary idealism and an optimistic trust in mechanical technology. International
Modernism seemed to represent not only all that was modern but also all that was
valuable in a devalued and degraded world. The generation following World War II had


less use for idealism, revolutionary or otherwise, and diminished trust in technology. It
was in that context that the Brutalist apothegm “An ethic, not an aesthetic” acquired
significance. The new generation embraced several precepts: first, that architecture
absorbed existential weight; second, that building was the result not of reasoning but of
ethical action; and finally, that International Style modernism was no more than shallow
aestheticism. It was the radicalism of its approach rather than the persuasiveness of its
early monuments that enabled Brutalism to force a transformation of the accepted
conventions of modernism. Despite its short life as an identifiable movement, Brutalism
came to occupy a central position in the redefinition of the history of 20th-century
architecture.

The first built Brutalist work was the Secondary School at Hunstanton in Norfolk,

England (Peter and Alison Smithson, 1954), which employed what seemed at first glance
to be a Miesian aesthetic of pure structural clarity. For a building at that time in Britain to
follow the example of Mies van der Rohe would have been provocative enough, but the
Hunstanton School added another dimension to Miesian clarity: that of the mundane, the
diurnal, the literal. Thereafter, the Smithsons turned their attention to larger questions,
especially the need for a new approach to public housing in post-World War II Europe.
Their new concerns resulted in no built works of their own, but their original ideas
became profoundly influential. The next range of Brutalist buildings were to be the works
of other young British architects; for example, the Terrace Housing (Howell, Howell, and
Amis, Hampstead, 1956), Langham House Development (Stirling and Gowan, Ham
Common, 1958), Architecture School Extension (Wilson and Hardy, Cambridge, 1959),
Park Hill Development (Sheffield City Architect, Sheffield, 1961), and Engineering
School Laboratories (Stirling and Gowan, Leicester, 1963), among others. All of those
examples shared an unyielding emphasis on structural clarity, spatial simplicity, and
material presence, and all contributed to the solidifying of the character of Brutalism in
the general imagination.
The origin of the term Brutalism is not reliably attested, but the most plausible
explanation comes from adaptation of the French phrase (rough concrete) to describe
the material qualities of many buildings in Europe after World War II, qualities
necessitated by a general lack of the time and resources necessary to obtain finer finishes.
In particular, two works by the Swiss-French architect, Le Corbusier—the Unite
d’Habitation (Marseilles, 1946-52) and the Maisons Jaoul (Neuilly, 1954)—played major
parts in establishing the Brutalist model. In the first case, the Unite d’Habitation
displayed unfinished, boldly concrete surfaces laid out in patterns directly descriptive of
the processes of its fabrication. In Maisons Jaoul, Le Corbusier employed rough
brickwork, tile-surfaced concrete vaults, and raw plywood, mimicking traditional
vernacular building with industrial materials. To be sure, at least one Brutalist building
had appeared in Britain by 1954, but that fact cannot obscure the role of Le Corbusier’s
works as precursors of the new wave. To the smooth white planes and elegantly balanced
compositions of International Style (to whose definition Le Corbusier himself had made
major contributions before 1939), Brutalism contrasted unfinished, natural-colored
surfaces and seemingly awkward arrangements of parts, only too often revealing messy
and formerly hidden mechanical functions. Indeed, even when smoothly finished,
Brutalist buildings appeared crude and ordinary, with what some critics saw as willful
perversity.


Again, although it was at first essentially a British phenomenon, Brutalism’s reach
soon included such European examples as the Architect’s House (A.Wogenscky, Remy-
les-Chevreuses, France, 1957), the Istituto Marchiondi (V.Vigano, Milan, Italy, 1959),
and the Alder House (Rothrist, Switzerland, 1958) and a factory (Thun, Switzerland,
1960), both by Atelier 5. Furthermore, the catalytic role of Le Corbusier endured with his
buildings for the Capitol Complex (Chandigarh, India, 1951-65), together with the
monastery of La Tourette (Eveux-surl’Arbresle, France, 1955), all of which employed
at heroic scale and with great expressiveness. In every case, the effect was of a kind of
peasant or industrial vernacular, using the simplest materials in the simplest ways,
applying them to modern programs at modern scale.

Nonetheless, despite its radical appearance, Brutalism could
at least ancestry in pre-World War II modernism. The early wor!

claim, if not legitimacy,
of Hugo Haering (Farm

Building, Garkau, Germany, 1925), and Antonio Sant’Elia (unbuilt Futurist projects,

Italy, 1911-14) were acknowledged sources. Before them, the
Behrens, Bruno Taut, and Hans Poelzig could be included as
would be wrong to ignore the role in the development of Brutal
ideas played by the contemporary architectural press. On the
continuing architectural periodical in Britain, gave much atten
vernacular tradition, early industrial monuments, and historic ur'

German architects Peter
forerunners. Equally, it
ism and the spread of its
one hand, the oldest
tion during the 1950s to
ban environments; on the

other, the newest, gave prominent place to the latest, the most provocative works.
Between them, seen as they were across the world, they contrived both to inspire young
British architects and to spread the message of the new British architecture.

Brutalism, or at least its influence, also traveled to the United States. In the Yale Art
Gallery Extension (Louis Kahn, New Haven, 1949-53), which predated most British
examples, sur faces were selectively coarse or smooth whereas composition was
rigorously classical. A decade later, in the Yale Art and Architecture Building (Paul
Rudolph, New Haven, 1961-63), which depended entirely on European models, surfaces
were uniformly roughened, material choices were entirely aesthetic, and composition was
wholly picturesque. In the Mummers’ Theater (J. Johansen, Oklahoma City, 1970),
surfaces were randomly rough, smooth, or colored; material choices were inconsistent;
and composition was accidental.

Brutalism’s historical origins shed light on the movement’s profound worldwide
influence, despite the fact that it was initiated by a small group of people in a relatively
small place (or of limited geography). Before World War II, monuments of international
modernism, based as it was on the industrialization of building, had been confined largely
to the countries of its origin; namely, Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia, France, and the
Netherlands. Although spread had begun before 1939, the years of the war had
interrupted that flow. After 1945 the triumph of international modernism seemed certain,

Engineering Building, at Leicester
University, England, designed by
James Stirling (1959)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

and so it came to pass in the most highly industrialized country in the world, the
United States, and in the work of architects trained in the 1930s. By contrast, the first
post-World War II generation in Britain knew this history but rejected it. In that view, the
war had shown that all those who had bought into the promise of an industrial utopia had
been fatally compromised. What was needed was an architecture that was industrially
based, but not ideological, and especially not political. Soviet Communism, Italian
Fascism, and German National Socialism had each claimed leadership of the modern
world and had employed architecture as demonstration of its claims. In the aftermath of
the most destructive warfare in European, if not world, history, it seemed clear that
architecture should assume a new role in society, a role dissociated from politics as such
and focused on human needs in the simplest sense. It was in response to that perception
that the first practitioners of Brutalism chose to employ exposed materials, rough

textures, and seemingly awkward compositions, and it was those physical characteristics
that came to typify the movement in the general understanding.

Despite the brevity of the list of genuinely Brutalist buildings, in Britain and
elsewhere, the influence of Brutalism lay far less in the aesthetic concerns demonstrated
in its built works than in the ethical concerns manifested in its challenge to accepted
views. In that respect, Brutalism took its place beside other contemporary phenomena;
namely, literature and film. The writings of Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre and the
films of Roberto Rossellini and Vittorio de Sica were only some of those manifestations
of postwar despair, rejection, and existential rage. In Britain the works of writers such as
John Osborne and John Braine, of painters such as Francis Bacon and John Bratby, and
of sculptors such as Eduardo Paolozzi and Reg Butler displayed a rejection not just of the
war and its seemingly pointless waste of lives and resources but also of the seemingly
meaningless continuation of the attitudes and practices of the past.

At first, Brutalism seemed, even to its most ardent adherents, to be an idea isolated in
time (the 1950s) and place (Britain). Its chronicler, Reyner Banham had little
confidence in Brutalism’s future recognition as more than a minor episode in the history
of 20th-century architecture. In both the senses, ethical and aesthetic, in which Brutalism
came to be viewed, that estimate was too pessimistic. The ethical part of Brutalism
survived because of its continuation of the principle established by A.W.N.Pugin and the
Cambridge Camden Society as far back as 1840: The ultimate test of design is its social
worth. The aesthetic aspect of Brutalism, assuming that the test of social worth has been
met, follows directly from material character—itself, if truthful, socially worthy by
definition. All over the built world today can be seen works that accept or challenge the
issues that Brutalism brought to attention; namely, if building is for the people, should it
not be of the people (vernacular forms)? If building is to invoke virtue, should it not itself
be virtuous (truth in materials)? If building is to be meaningful, should it not embody
meaning in itself (social worth)? The questions put by Brutalism have yet to be answered
with finality, and that is its continuing legacy.

B.M.BOYLE
Banham, Reyner (United States); Concrete; Le Corbusier (Jeanneret,
Charles-Edouard) (France); International Style; Kahn, Louis (United
States); Parliament Building, Chandigarh; Rudolph, Paul (United States);
Sant’Elia, Antonio (Italy); School; Smithson, Peter and Alison (Great
Britain); Stirling, James (Great Britain); Unite d’Habitation, Marseilles

Cité Radieuse

Further Reading

The fundamental information on Brutalism appeared first in the pages of the British
periodicals (1954-61) and (1954-57), which provided the only contemporaneous
reporting on the movement and its works; most, but not all, of that record was resumed in
Banham (1966, which also included much extra-neous material). A useful summary is
found in William Curtis (1983, chapter 24). The Smithsons’ writings are the essential
sources on Brutalism.

Banham, Reyner, London: The Architectural Press, 1966
Curtis, William, Oxford: Phaidon Press, 1982; Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1983
Jencks, Charles, Garden City: Anchor Books, 1973 (see especially chapter 7)
Smithson, Alison, and Peter Smithson, “Louis Kahn,” in — edited by Trevor Dannatt,
London: Paul Elek, 1960; New York: Chemical Publishing Co., 1960
Smithson, Alison, and Peter Smithson, London: Latimer New Dimensions, 1973
Webster, Helena (editor), London: Academy Editions, 1997

BUCHAREST, ROMANIA

As the capital of Romania, Bucharest can be also considered the primary source of the
country’s modern architecture, beginning in the second half of the 19th century and
continuing throughout the 20th century. Like other major European capitals, the search to
define an emblematic national character for Bucharest’s architecture developed in
relationship to historical precedents as well as the contemporary milieu.

The 19th century represented a period of major change for Bucharest in both political
and cultural realms. The first half of the century encouraged Western European values of
culture and civilization, thus announcing a massive import of several architectural
currents—mainly neoclassicism and Romanticism—that progressively changed the
Oriental aspect of the city. In 1859, as the principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia
unified, Bucharest became the capital of the new state of Romania and, in 1878, after the
country won its independence from the Ottoman Empire, the capital of the kingdom of
Romania. This gain in political prestige was reflected in the architectural field by an
important campaign of building monumental official institutions and luxury residencies,
all inspired by the French eclecticism of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. French influence,
dispersed through the work of French architects or Romanians trained at the Ecole,
became so considerable that the city was nicknamed “Little Paris.” Urban planning
followed the same way of modernization by assimilating the French model, as it
happened for the creation of a series of boulevards inspired by Baron von Haussmann’s
Parisian model. Parallel to the spread of foreign currents, the first Romanian architects
attempted to create a style based on a national expression in Bucharest, interpreting the
rich heritage of historic and folk tradition.

As the majority of Romanian architects studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris,
even after the foundation of the School of Architecture in Bucharest in 1892, their
production mirrored the French aesthetic (primarily the historical revivalism and
academicism of Beaux-Arts or the neobaroque). Among the most important public
buildings designed according to the French method were the Palace of the Chamber of
Deputies (1907) and the Military Circle (1912), both by Dimitrie Maimarolu, and the
Palace of the Bourse (1911) by Stefan Burcus. However, the magnificence of the French
influence was reflected mostly in the sumptuous compositions of private dwellings, such
as those designed by Ion D. Berindey (1871-1928) and Petre Antonescu (1873-1965).

In contrast, the development of a “national” style emerged as a reaction against the
omnipresent foreign stylistic models. Its aesthetics exalted the local tradition, interpreting


major examples from the Wallachian architecture of the 18th century (considered as the
most representative) and assimilating the craftsmanship and ornamentation of the folk
architecture. The first buildings to incorporate a Romanian-based style were private
homes, designed in tribute to a historicist vision rather than the modern International
Style. The General National Exposition in 1906, celebrating 40 years of the reign of King
Carol I, brought the official consecration of what could be called an indigenous
Romanian style of architecture. Its picturesque character made it increasingly popular for
residential architecture, but it also developed a monumental dimension, suitable for the
public programs, such as the Institute of Geology (1906) by Victor Stefanescu, the
Ministry of Public Works (1910) and the Bank Marmorosch-Blank (1912), both by Petre
Antonescu, the School of Architecture (1912-26) by Grigore Cerchez, and the Museum
of National Art (1912-38) by Nicolae Ghika-Budesti.

The creation of greater Romania after World War I by the unification of the ancient
kingdom with Transylvania, Bessarabia, and Bukovina initiated a flourishing period for
the country that fully benefited its capital as well. Bucharest developed into the most
vibrant economic and cultural center of Romania and doubled in population. The
“national” style became the official architecture for all architectural programs, from
administrative buildings to social housing designed by architects such as Antonescu, Paul
Smarandescu, and Static Ciortan.

Economic prosperity and a governmental legislation that encouraged construction
transformed Bucharest into a huge building site. The penetration of new architectural
ideas and modernist architecture was favored by several institutions and particularly
among intellectual circles with shared progressive or avant-garde views. Modernist
architecture never achieved an official status, but nevertheless it became the emblem of
post-World War II dynamism. In fact, the first important modernist building, the ARO
building (1929-31), was designed by Horia Creanga for such an institution: the insurance
company Asigurarea Romaneasca (ARO). Other important public buildings developed
the potential of modernism, including those designed by Duliu Marcu, Rudolf Fraenkel,
and Arghir Culina. On the other hand, the language of modern architecture—reductive
geometries based on the grid, the elimination of ornamentation and historical references,
the adaptation of technological materials such as steel and glass—was adopted largely in
the housing programs by Horia Creanga, Ion Boceanu, Duliu Marcu, Tiberiu Niga, Octav
Doicescu, and many others. Modernism was consecrated as a consumer architecture, and
its various typologies of habitation, from the apartment buildings or villas to social
housing, spread all over the city and to its suburbs. Several compact areas of the city were
newly created during the 1930s, such as the central boulevards Take Ionescu and
Bratianu and the marginal district Vatra Luminoasa, renovations that generated a
completely new urban image. Among the industrial buildings, which were situated
mainly at the periphery of the city, included the Malaxa Industries building (1930-40) by
Creanga. Despite the austerity of the Creanga’s modernist vocabulary, he reached a
remarkable expressive force that remained unequaled in the production of the industrial
architecture.

Modernist architecture also shaped the national style, the latter of which adopted the
former’s principles of formal simplicity and monumentality, developing a new expression
and thus avoiding a certain regression induced by second-rate production. Modernism


was embraced mainly by the young architects, such as Doicescu, Henriette Delavrancea-
Gibory, and Constantin Iotzu.

By the end of the 1930s, the increased authoritarian politics of King Carol II, who
declared his personal dictatorship in 1938, resulted in the promotion of a nostalgic
classicism, common in the whole of Europe of the time. Frequently called “the style
Carol II,” this tendency became the symbol of the official architecture, and it found in
Duiliu Marcu, architect of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1937-44), its most
accomplished exponent.

The installation of the Communist regime brought, among other
consequences, “The Socialist Reconstruction” of Bucharest, an ideological
and architectural movement that conferred a “suitable” image upon the
city as a new socialist capital; this period extended from 1952 to 1989.
However, although they almost always ignored precedent, the
interventions on the urban fabric did not radically modify the central area
of the city until

The ARO (Asigurarea Romaneasca)
Building, Bucharest, Romania,
designed by Horia Creanga (1931)

© Carmen Popescu

the last years of the Communist regime. The sole important intervention of the early
years was that of the complex of buildings (1959-60), by Horia Maicu and collective,
erected in the Palace Square, which also included the former royal palace, reconverted
into the National Museum of Art. The 1950s were marked, more than anywhere else in
the country, by the coexistence of Stalinist architecture with rationalism, actually a
continuation of the interwar architecture. The classicist formalism of the Casa Scintei
(The House of the Spark, 1950-51, Horia Maicu, Ludovic Staadecker, M.Alifanti, and
N.Badescu), of the Romanian Opera House (1952-53, Doicescu), and of the housing
program (the districts of Vatra Luminoasa and Bucurestii Noi) was contemporaneous—
and sometimes executed by the same architects—with works that displayed the strong
and authentic rationalism of the 1930s to 1940s, such as the Baneasa Airport (1948;
M.Alifanti, N.Badescu, A.Damina, and P. Macovei), the Pediatric Hospital “Emilia Irza”
(1950; Gr. Ionescu), the Pavilion H of the Expositional Center (1953; A. Damian), and
the Palace of the National Broadcasting (1960; T.Ricci, L.Garcia, and M.Ricci).

The 1960s and early 1970s brought an opening toward Western European culture,
including architecture. At the same time, this period was one of intensive construction
activity. Housing was built, mainly in the peripheral districts of Balta Alba, Drumul
Taberei, and Berceni. However, the most interesting architecture of these years were the
functionalist public buildings, such as the State Circus (1960; N.Porumbescu), the
Dorobanti Hotel (1974; V.Nitulescu, P.Vraciu, and Al. Beldiman), and the campus of the
Polytechnic Institute (1962-72; Doicescu and collective).

After a violent earthquake in the city in 1977, the idea of a socialist capital was
invigorated with the building of the Civic Center, which was of national importance and
was intended to solidify architecture’s relationship to political totalitarianism and
nationalism. This huge architectural complex, which was not yet completed in 1989, was
situated at the limit of the historic center and was erected on a massively demolished area
(about 500 hectares). During these years, the Bucharest architecture and particularly that
of the Civic Center and the House of the Republic abandoned the previous principles of
rationalism and functionalism in favor of a style that responded to the new ideological
orientation.

The 1990s focused on the restoration of the area destroyed in the 1970s and 1980s and
on the erection of the Civic Center. The international architectural contest “Bucharest
2000” (1995-96), organized by the Union of Romanian Architects, showed—particularly
through the designers of the winning project (Meinhard von Gerkan and Joachim Zais,
Germany)—viable solutions for articulating this area with the traditional urban fabric of
the city and possibilities for synchronizing Bucharest architecture with contemporary
European experiences.

CARMEN POPESCU AND NICOLAE LASCU

Further Reading

Bucuresti: Simetria, 1994
Bucuresti: Editura UAR, 1992
Constantin, Paul, Bucuresti: Meridiane, 1972
(Romanian catalog at the Venice Biennial), Bucuresti: Simetria, [1996]

Ionescu, Grigore, Bucuresti: Editura Academiei, 1982
Ionescu, Grigore, “Arhitectura romaneasca dupa al doilea razboi mondial,” no. 3-4
(1991)
Machedon, Luminita, and Ernie Schoffham, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and
London, England: MIT Press, 1999

BUDAPEST, HUNGARY

Budapest is the capital of Hungary, and is the industrial, commercial, and cultural center
of the country. The city is situated on the Danube River, in the geographic center of the
region. With the compromise between Hungary and Austria in 1867, a period of
economic prosperity and a population growth of enormous speed began. In 1869 the three
towns (Buda, Pest, and Obuda) that were to be united four years later into Budapest had
280, 349 inhabitants. At the turn of the century, Budapest already had a population of
733,350. In 1871 the first international competition in urban development was announced
to restructure the capital. Its program underlined the importance of the Chain Bridge as
the central connection between Buda and Pest. A system of boulevards and avenues was
realized as the result of the competition and subsequent revisions, and the urban structure
of Budapest today is determined by the largescale realization of what was probably the
most consistent attempt to create a bourgeois city in Europe.

The Danube is the determining element of the monumental cityscape, its sweep
underlined by the closed building facades on the embankments. The architectural
treatment of the river-front and St. Marguerite Island, which became an urban park, was
seen by many urban planners of the time as a major achievement. The problem of
creating well-functioning connections between Pest and Buda was solved by a number of
bridges. The Buda side is dominated by the Gellért Hill and the Castle Hill with the
neobaroque Royal Castle (1880-91, Miklés Ybl and 1891-1905, Alajos Hauszmann) at
its top. The business center is on the (flat) Pest side, whose riverfront is dominated by the
colossal neo-Gothic Houses of Parliament (1904, Imre Steindl) and more recent hotels
that replace those destroyed in World War IL

The basis of Budapest’s prosperity was the grain-milling industry and the processing
and sale of other agricultural goods in the Carpathian basin. Urban development was
conducted by the Council of Public Works (1870-1949), a body related to the
municipality as well as to the government. The downtown business and residential
district was executed during the last three decades of the 19th century. The typical
residential unit of Budapest was a block of rental apartments with an interior courtyard.
Access to the individual flats was from open galleries in the courtyard. The quality of
apartments and the social status of their inhabitants could differ within a one-block area.
Upper-middle-class families built summer residences and villas on the green hills of
Buda. Low-income families lived on the outskirts of the city, near industrial zones.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Budapest’s architecture showed a pluralism of
styles: beside the various neostyles (Stock Exchange, 1905, Ignac Alpar), many
variations of Art Nouveau emerged (Academy of Music, 1907, Korb and Giergl),


indicating connections with Vienna and other European cities. Odén Lechner, whose
major work was the Postal Savings Bank (1901), and his followers tried to create a
national style that aimed to express Hungarian identity, using ornaments of peasant
embroideries and Oriental art. Early modern tendencies (Rézsavélgyi Building, 1912,
Béla Lajta), and National Romanticism (Calvinist Church, 1912, Aladdr Arkay) also
emerged. Most of the architects graduated from the Technical University of Budapest,
such as the group of National Romanticists known as the “Young Ones” (Karoly Kos,
Dénes Gyérgyi, Dezsé6 Zrumeczky, Béla Janszky, Valér Mende, and others). Their
architecture was influenced by Scandinavian National Romanticism (Eliel Saarinen and
Lars Sonck) as well as by the English Arts and Crafts movement.

The first social building program of Budapest was initiated by Mayor Istvan Barezy in
1908. As the result, between 1909 and 1913, Budapest built 25 blocks of flats and 19
colonies of small family houses for 6,000 families in three cycles (Wekerle housing
estate, a garden city of Budapest, 1912-13, by Karoly Kos and others) as well as 55
public schools. The apartment block on Visegradi Street (1910, Béla Malnai and Gyula
Haasz) shows the emerging neoclassicism before World War I that put an end to the
dynamic development. The multinational Austro-Hungarian monarchy lost the war and
broke up into small national states in 1919. The economy recovered slowly during the
1920s. With most architects and artists of the avant-garde working abroad, the early
1920s was a period of a conservative neobaroque and other revivalist tendencies. A new,
functionalist aesthetics could only break through from 1929 on. The Hungarian CLAM
(Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne) group, with Farkas Molnar, Jozsef
Fischer, Pal Ligeti, and Gyérgy Masirevich as its most significant members, was radica.
and politically engaged but could realize only a few large-scale projects, such as the
housing development (1934) on Kéztarsasag Square. However, the group built a number
of villas for reformminded individuals.

In the 1930s, Budapest’s architecture started to show the impact of Italian rationalism,
such as the Church in Varosmajor (1936, Aladér and Bertalan Arkay). The real
breakthrough occurred around 1935, when a “domesticated” modernism, stripped bare of
its social aims, became accepted by a large part of the population. Many apartment and
office buildings represent a very high aesthetic and technical quality, such as the Atrium
cinema and apartments (1936, Lajos Kozma), the Dunapark apartment building (1937,
Béla Hofstatter and Ferenc Domany), and the Financial Center (1939, Laszlé Lauber and
Istvan Nyiri). In the early 1940s, two large working-class housing estates of detached
houses were built in Angyalf6ld and at Albertfalva, financed by the Social Security Fund.

World War II did not spare the city; the population, as well as housing, infrastructure,
and economy, suffered enormous damages. Reconstruction work, which began
immediately after the war, was a long process that included apartments being built on the
lots of destroyed houses in Buda Castle by Gyérgy Janossy and by Zoltan Farkasdy
(among others). In 1948 the Communist Party assumed power and introduced total state
control over the production and distribution of goods, including housing. Now, urban and
architectural planning took place exclusively in large, state-owned offices with hundreds
of employees. During the 1950s, the development of large-scale industry was forced. The
quality reached a higher level in works of the planning office IPARTERV, specialized for
industrial buildings. An outstanding example of early postwar public building in the
International Style was the Trade Union Headquarters (1949, Lajos Gadoros and others).


Between 1951 and 1953, the Communist Party forced the style of “socialist realism,”

following Soviet models (People’s Stadium, 1953, Karoly David; Institute building “R”
of the Technical University, 1955, Gyula Rimanoczy). In 1956 political oppression led to
an uprising against Communism. The uprising was crushed by Soviet tanks, but the party
was forced to begin a process of liberalization. Elements of a market economy were
introduced in 1968. A large-scale building program to eliminate housing shortage had
already been announced in 1960. Using traditional technology, housing estates of usually
2,000 flats were built in the inner residential zone. During the second half of the 1960s,
four plants producing prefabricated building parts were set into operation, and housing
estates of 10,000 flats were built in the transitory residential zone (Kispest, Budafok,
Rakospalota, Békésmegyer, and Ujpest). In the 1970s the peak decade of the housing
production, the state built 105, 907 flats, or 65.7 percent of the whole production.
However, both the quantity and the quality of output were met with public dissatisfaction,
giving rise to a search for an organic language of architecture as represented by the
internationally publicized buildings of Imre Makovecz (funerary chapel, Farkasrét
Cemetery, 1977). Efforts were made, by using standardized designs, to satisfy the needs
for kindergartens, schools, stores, public health facilities, and other services. In 1970 the
Master School of Architects, an important forum for the exchange of ideas that was
closed in the 1950s, was reorganized. Buildings such as the CHEMOLIMPEX Office
Building (1964, Zoltan Gulyas), the DOMUS Furniture Store (1974, Peter Reimholz and
Antal Lazar), the MEDICOR Office Building (1975, Zoltan Gulyas and Peter Reimholz),
and the RADELKIS Office Building (1978, Antal Csakvary) are in line with international
tendencies of the time. Sports facilities with ingenious structures were built, such as
Spartacus Swimming Pool (1983, Adam Sylvester). Public transportation was
strengthened by opening the east-west (1974) and north-south (1984) Metro lines.
The process of significant economic and political change had already begun before the
fall of Communism in 1989. Most of the large state-owned planning offices collapsed or
became privatized. Foreign capital and international businesses have been moving to
Budapest. Transforming 19th-century apartment blocks, banks are settling in the
downtown area (ING Bank, 1994, Erick van Egeraat and MECANOO Architects), and
high-tech office buildings, such as the Siemens Headquarters (1999, Péter Reimholz and
Antal Lazar), give the capital a late 20th-century skyline, at least in its details. New
ensembles are developing, such as the Graphisoft plant (1998, Ferenc Csagoly and Ferenc
Keller). Shopping malls are introducing Americanstyle commercial architecture into the
urban periphery. State-financed housing construction stopped, but private housing is on
the rise. The reconstruction process of residential blocks of the inner city has started.
Budapest has been developing from an industrial city into a tertiary economy city since
the 1960s.

KATALIN MORAVANSZK Y-GYONGY AND AKOS MORAVANSZKY
Hungary
Further Reading

Enyedi, Gyérgy, and Viktéria Szirmai, translated by Vera Gathy, London: Belhaven
Press, and New York: Halsted Press, 1992

Lorinczi, Zsuzsa, and Mihaly Vargha (editors), [Architectural Guide: Architecture
in Budapest from the Turn of the Century to the Present], Budapest: 6 BT, 1997

BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA

Throughout the 20th century, several factors contributed to Buenos Aires’s architectural
significance. In the early decades of the century, when Buenos Aires was the capital of
one of the wealthiest countries in the world, architects were commissioned to design
luxurious residences and institutional buildings, many influenced by French and Italian
styles. Later, different immigrant groups looking for status constructed important
examples that followed European traits of Viennese secession, Italian liberty, and Catalan
modernism. The rationalist architecture of the early 1930s and 1940s in Buenos Aires is
one the most significant of the world. This era of architecture greatly influenced the
present profile of the city. Also relevant are the examples of Brutalist architecture. The
ast decades of the century have been characterized by an interest in preserving this rich
architectural heritage and by new architectural interventions related to the existing urban
fabric.

Buenos Aires is situated by the estuary of the Rio de la Plata and the plains. The city
became a federal district in 1880 and since then has gained more political, financial, and
administrative power. In 1910 the mayor, Torcuato de Alvear, inspired by the Beaux-Arts
influence and the Parisian example of Baron von Haussmann in the 1850s, provided the
city with a framework of avenues, plazas, and parks.

In the early 20th century, the city consisted of a basic infrastructure of institutional
buildings and magnificent private residences following Italian academic styles. Carlos
Morra designed the former National Library (1901) and Victor Meano and Julio Dormal
the Colon Theater (1908). Later, French influence dominated the city. Alexander
Christophersen designed the Anchorena Palace (1909; today the Palace of Foreign
Affairs). The Frenchman René Sergent designed three large residences, among them the
Errazuriz Palace (1911). Utilitarian architecture followed English influence. Retiro
(1914), the major train station, was designed by Conder, Conder, Farmer, and Follet, with
the metallic structure produced by Morton and Co. in Liverpool. The opening of avenues
such as May Avenue and North Diagonal completed a scheme that transformed Buenos
Aires into the “Paris of South America.”

In the 1920s, academic dominance was affected by two other tendencies, namely the
importation of European-derived Art Nouveau and the reemergence of pride in the
Spanish heritage and the Ibero-American roots of the city. Immigrants who found a taste
of economic power sought expressions for their new status. Italians such as Mario
Palenti, who designed Pasaje Barolo (1923), expressed this reaction against academic
architecture; Joaquin Garcia Nifiez designed for the Spanish colony; and Martin Noel
designed a residence that today houses the Museum Fernandez Blanco (1916), a neo-
Colonial building with Spanish decoration and details. Also inspired by the Spanish High
Renaissance is the Cervantes Theater (1921) by Aranda and Repetto. In the 1920s, Art
Deco challenged the preference for traditional academic architecture. Deco details were


linked to modern buildings: cinemas, parking garages, banks, and apartments. An
important representative of this tendency is Alejandro Virasoro, who designed the House
of Theater (1927), the Santander Bank (1926), and the Equitativa del Plata (1929).

Le Corbusier visited Buenos Aires in 1929 and gave a series of ten lectures, the most
comprehensive of his career. Werner Hegemann followed him in 1931. Although both
spoke of a harmonious synthesis, they offered different approaches to resolve the
problems of the growing metropolis. Le Corbusier’s influence was felt a decade later with
the creation of the Austral Group and with the Plan for Buenos Aires (1938, in
collaboration with Ferrari Hardoy and Kurchan). His enduring influence was felt also in
many Brutalist projects in the following decades.

As a result of his visit, Le Corbusier was inspired by the gigantic landscape and wrote
his book, (1930). Similarly, Hegemann’s ideas influenced the urbanist Carlos della
Paolera and some projects by Jorge Kalnay.

Several factors, such as the academic influence, the Beaux-Arts model for the
education of the architect, the German-language influence, and the Art Deco materials
and detail, generated a series of buildings between the late 1930s and 1940s that has been
characterized as part of the “School of Buenos Aires.” At this time, major avenues helped
define the city as a metropolis—Corrientes, Santa Fe, 9 de Julio, and General Paz—and
the city acquired a more cosmopolitan atmosphere.

Alejandro Bustillo was the architect of the first modernist building of Buenos Aires,
Maison Ocampo (1929). Yet, showing the eclectic nature of the time, he later developed
a classical language, as in the headquarters of the Argentinean Central Bank (1939). Two
important buildings are the COMEGA (1932) by Alfredo Joselevich and Enrique Douillet
and the SAFICO (1934) by Walter Moll. By the early 1940s, modernism triumphed as the
dominant style. The Kavanagh Apartment Building (1936) by Sanchez, Lagos and de la
Torre, for example, evinces an extraordinary modernist silhouette within the urban
landscape. This 30-story building won an Award of the American Society of Engineering
(1994). Moreover, the Grand Rex Cinema (1937) by Alberto Prebish exhibits purist
moder lines and architectural economy, and his Obelisk (1936), located at the
intersection of three major avenues, remains a landmark and symbol of the city.

The apartments of Libertador and Lafinur (1937) by Sanchez, Lagos and de la Torre
constituted a signpost of modern architecture in Argentina. The ateliers of Suipacha and
Paraguay (1938) by Antonio Bonet, Vera Barros, and Lopez Chas suggest the flexibility,
open plan, and experimentation with material but also mark one the first buildings to be
distanced from orthodox rationalism in Buenos Aires.

Antonio Ubaldo Vilar produced works combining functionality and a pure
formal language, namely the Central Headquarters (1943) of the
Automobile Club of Argentina. With the arrival of Peron (1946-52 and
1952-55), industrialization and legislation to improve social conditions
marked a new period in Buenos Aires. The city attracted immigrants from
the interior

ATC (Argentina Televisora Color)
Building, designed by Manteola,
Sanchez Gémez, Santos, Solsona,
Vifioly

© Jose Bernardi

of the country, requiring the populist regime to provide large housing complexes and
infrastructure as well as buildings to meet needs for health care, education, and
recreation.

At the middle of the century, Amancio Williams designed an unrealized proposal
(1945) for an airport for the city designed to stand over the river on immense Le
Corbusian . The study of the Regulatory Plan for the city (1947-49), done by Kurchan
and Hardoy in collaboration with Le Corbusier, marks the Modern movement’s maturity.

The most important work of the 1950s is the Theater General San Martin (1953-60)-
by Mario Roberto Alvarez and Macedonio Ruiz and, connected to it, the Cultural Center
San Martin (1960-64) by Alvarez and Associates. Detailed with refinement and quality
of materials, this building denotes the influences of the International Style.

In the 1960s, the work of Clorindo Testa, as in the Bank of London (1966), indicates a
significant turning point in the city’s architecture. Aesthetically derived from Le
Corbusier’s principles of reductivism and lack of ornamentation, the bank’s exterior
reflects the Brutalist use of concrete for rationalist ends. The Headquarters of the Bank of
the City of Buenos Aires (1967) by Manteola, Sanchez Gomez, Santos, Solsona, and
Vifioly is also significant: a box of glass bricks framed by a metallic structure, it was one
of the first examples of recycled architecture in Buenos Aires.

A significant building of the 1970s is the ATC Argentina Televisora Color (1978) by
Manteola, Sanchez Gomez, Santos, Solsona, and Vifioly, associated with Salaberry and
Tarsitano, a landmark in the urban landscape. The National Library (contest won in 1962,

construction began in 1972, and completed in 1992) by Testa, Bulrich, and Cazzaniga
was remarkable for its underground storage of books and sculptured and elevated reading
areas. Also characteristic of this period is the work of Jorge Roberto Alvarez and
Associates, who produced works known for their durability, order, and asceticism.
Among their buildings, SOMISA (1975) met a technological challenge to design all the
building’s parts within a tolerance of three millimeters.

In 1972 Catalinas Norte, in the Retiro area, began again to incorporate the river into
the life of the city. The Conurban building (1973) by the Kocourek studio with
Katzenstein and Llorens uses a curtain wall in the facade facing the river and brick in the
facade looking to the city and is one of the best of the whole complex.

The Cultural Center (1980) in the Recoleta area by Bedel, Benedit, and Testa, a
recycled Franciscan monastery, is today an active popular center of contemporary art,
experimental art galleries, and shops. The complex was completed with the more
whimsical Buenos Aires Design Center (1994) by Testa, Genoud, and Graci.

Since 1991 the Madero docks area (built in 1887-97) has been rehabilitated in one of
the most successful urban interventions in the city’s recent history. The utilitarian
buildings of the dock have been recycled as apartments, restaurants, and shops as a
natural extension of the center of the city. Several new towers have changed the profile of
the city’s skyline. The twin towers (1997) of High Palermo Plaza by Urgell, Fazio, and
Penedo and the studio of Sanchez Gomez, Manteola, and Santos Solsona present an
urban doorway to the Palermo area, enlivened by the Postmodernist and ornamental Alto
Palermo Shopping (1990) by Juan Lopez.

Buenos Aires enters the 21st century immersed in the revolutionary changes in
technology and the process of globalization. The city has successfully implemented new
programs to recuperate areas of the city, open the city to its river, and rehabilitate
buildings in Mayo, Rivadavia, and Corrientes Avenues. In addition, historical
neighborhoods, such as San Telmo and Monserrat, have begun to be rebuilt. All these
actions indicate that Buenos Aires is as interested in preserving its past as it is in
constructing its future. The city, once called the “Paris of South America,” is still
recognized for its European heritage and remains one of the great metropolises of the
world.

JOSE BERNARDI
Alvarez, Mario Roberto (Argentina); Art Deco; Brutalism; Corbusier, Le
(Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Hegemann, Werner (Germany);
Manteola, Sanchez Gomez, Santos, Solsona, Vifioly (Argentina);
Rationalism; Testa, Clorindo (Argentina); Williams, Amancio (Argentina)

Further Reading

342 (July/August 1995) (special issue devoted to Buenos Aires, with full text in
English)
Le Corbusier, Paris: Crés, 1930; reprint, Paris: Altamira, 1994; as
translated by Edith Schreiber Aujame, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1991
Petrina, Alberto, and Liliana Asian, Buenos Aires: Municipalidad de la Ciudad de
Buenos Aires, 1994; 2nd edition, 1998

BUNGALOW

As the 19th century drew to a close and the 20th began, Victorian ideals and the domestic
architecture that embodied them were coming under increased scrutiny. Beginning in the
1880s, the Arts and Crafts movement and its bungalows would transform the landscape
of American domestic architecture and serve as a transitional housing form in the years
prior to World War II. Between 1900 and 1930, the bungalow was the most widespread
housing type in the country, from city to suburb.

Bungalows responded to a constellation of sociocultural forces and economic
necessities, particularly to the Progressive Era philosophy of the Arts and Crafts
movement. As the cost of previously unavailable household technologies such as indoor
plumbing and electricity increased, the size of American homes was reduced to
compensate for these expenses (which could add between 25 and 40 percent to a home’s
cost). At the same time, “simplicity” became a watchword of the Arts and Crafts
movement, which was taking shape in the United States with the help of publications
such as Gustav Stickley’s magazine. For Arts and Crafts proponents, the craftsman-
inspired bungalow provided an economically advantageous, socially responsible, and
artistic dwelling for members of the middle and working classes.

Bungalow scholar Clay Lancaster explains that “the word ‘bungalow’ originated in
India, derived from the Bengali noun meaning a low house with galleries or porches all
around” (see Lancaster, 1985). The first American bungalows appeared along the eastern
seaboard as a type of resort architecture. Much grander in scale than the more modest
bungalows that followed, these early bungalows nevertheless included the ample porches
and exposed-framing construction that are typical of the form. Although not all scholars
agree on this point, the architects who are usually credited with perfecting the bungalow
style in the United States are Charles Sumner Greene and Henry Mather Greene. In
addition to the Greenes, architect Frank Lloyd Wright’s Prairie style of domestic
architecture influenced mid-western bungalows. In California, where the bungalow was
most popular, Arthur and Alfred Heineman were well known for pioneering the concept
of the “bungalow court,” featuring multiple bungalows around a central courtyard.

Beginning in the early 1900s, the Greene brothers designed a number of relatively
inexpensive California homes as well as the “Ultimate Bungalows,” for which they are
best known (for example, the Blacker House [1907] and the Gamble House [1908]). The
distinguishing features of the Greenes’ style include (1) a heavy use of wood and natural
materials, such as clinker brick and river stone; (2) exposed interior and exterior joinery;
(3) the use of sleeping and living porches to enhance the occupants’ contact with nature;
(4) a concern for the “total design” of a home, including its textiles and furnishings; and
(5) the use of relatively open floor plans. Many of these features are evident in simpler
and smaller bungalows that feature natural building materials, wide porches with heavy
(typically masonry) columns, and low-pitched roofs with exposed rafters and joinery. In
addition to these features, many bungalows incorporate outdoor gardens with pergolas,
porches specifically designed for sleeping, and prominent chimneys constructed of rustic
materials.

Architectural historian Marcus Whiffen (1969) explains that “it was the bungalow as
much as any other kind of house that led to the adoption of the ‘living room’ and the


‘outdoor-indoor’ living space—of craftsmanship, climatic adaptation, and harmony with
the landscape.”

The simple floor plans of most bungalows maximize the amount of interior space
available by discarding the Victorian parlor in favor of a combined living and dining
area, often separated by a colonnade or book arch. The typical bungalow plan provides a
kitchen at the rear, a living-dining area with the living area at the front of the home, and
two bedrooms with a bathroom between them. To maximize the bungalow’s limited
interior space, built-in furniture pieces, such as buffets, bookcases, and seating
inglenooks, were integral features. Built-ins enhanced the beauty of a room with their
natural woodwork while contributing to the reputation of the bungalow as an easily kept
home.

Bungalows vary somewhat by region in terms of their exterior appearance, building
materials, and interior plans. Bungalows in the eastern United States tend to exhibit an
English influence, whereas west coast bungalows draw inspiration alternately from Japan
and the Swiss chalet. Such observations are only guidelines, however, as the widespread
diffusion of the bungalow through plan books and mail-order catalogs has functioned to
minimize regional differences. The typically wooden exterior of the bungalow is also
occasionally replaced or joined by stucco, brick, or stone. The most typical interior
variation of the bungalow is the provision of an extra bedroom or breakfast area. In
addition, many two-story homes can be characterized as bungalows despite the fact that
the term usually denotes a one-story home. Two-story “bungaloid” homes (as Marcus
Whiffen calls them) often feature dormer windows to maintain a relatively low profile

appearance.
Potential home owners could build a bungalow from an architect’s original plans,
purchase bungalow plans from widely available catalogs such as or buy a

prefabricated bungalow kit from companies such as Sears and Roebuck or Aladdin. Mail-
order bungalows produced by Sears, Aladdin, and several smaller companies appeared in
1906 and reached their greatest popularity between 1910 and 1930. An estimated one-
half million mail-order homes were produced between 1900 and the start of World War II
in 1939. Today mail-order houses can be found throughout the country.

Beginning with the stock market crash of 1929 and continuing through the Great
Depression, the popularity of the bungalow declined, as did interest in domestic building
generally. The construction industry was dealt a sharp blow by the enduring economic
crisis, with housing starts falling a precipitous 90 percent between 1925 and 1933. By the
time the country emerged from World War II, the affordable mass-produced suburban
house had eclipsed the picturesque bungalow. Nevertheless, the bungalow and its
attendant philosophy of the simple life established attitudes about the home that persist
today.

CYNTHIA DUQUETTE SMITH
Arts and Crafts Movement; Greene, Henry M. and Charles S. (United
States); Prairie School; Stickley, Gustav (United States); Wright, Frank
Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

Architectural histories that focus on American domestic building are provided by Clark,
Gowans, Whiffen, and Wright. Lancaster focuses on the bungalow form specifically.
Additional sources below provide further information about the Arts and Crafts
movement with respect to the bungalow and mail-order houses produced by Aladdin and
Sears.
Aladdin Company, Bay City, Michigan: Aladdin, 1917; reprint, as New York:
Dover, and London: Constable, 1995
Clark, Clifford, Jr., Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986
Gowans, Alan, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
King, Anthony D., Boston and London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1984; 2nd
edition, New York: Oxford University Press, 1995
Lancaster, Clay, New York: Abbeville Press, 1985
Rybezynski, Witold, New York: Viking, 1993
Schweitzer, Robert, and Michael W.R.Davis, Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State
University Press, 1990
Sears, Roebuck and Company, Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, 1926; reprint, as
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Athenaeum of Philadelphia, and New York: Dover, 1991

Stevenson, Katherine Cole, and H.Ward Jandl, Washington, D.C.: Preservation
Press, 1986
Trapp, Kenneth R., et al., New York: Abbeville Press, and Oakland, California:
Oakland Museum, 1993
Whiffen, Marcus, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1969; revised edition,
1992
Wright, Gwendolyn, New York: Pantheon, 1981

BUNSHAFT, GORDON 1909-90

Architect, United States

Gordon Bunshaft was a partner in the New York office of Skidmore, Owings and
Merrill and was an adherent of European modernism as well as one of the leaders of a
generation of architects who made buildings of glass, metal, reinforced concrete, and
travertine familiar in North America. At his best, he created works of highly refined
proportion, efficient function, imaginative construction, and adaptation to sites that were
often difficult. His later works were often bulkier and simplified in geometric form;
nevertheless they include imaginative solutions to complicated problems, humane
consideration for those who work in them, and dramatic boldness. His work encompassed
institutional buildings such as the Beinecke Library (1963) for rare books and
manuscripts at Yale University (a building he thought might potentially be his most
enduring work), the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden (1974) on the Mall in

Washington, D.C., and the presidential library for Lyndon Johnson in Austin, Texas
(1971). Corporate headquarters built to his designs included Lever House (1952) in New
York City, the Banque Lambert (1965) in Brussels, the American Can Company offices
(1970) in Greenwich, Connecticut, and the National Commercial Bank (1983) in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia. Buildings for business constituted most of the works for which he became
well known, although he also designed other types of structures. These included the
Venezuelan Pavilion at the World’s Fair of 1939 (held in New York City), the Istanbul
Hilton Hotel (1955) in association with Sedad Eldem, a pristine cubic addition to the
Albright-Knox Museum (1962) in Buffalo, New York, the Philip Morris Cigarette
Manufacturing Plant (1974) in Richmond, Virginia (where garden courts alternate with
work areas), the spectacular Haj Terminal at the Jeddah airport (in collaboration with the
engineer, Fazlur Khan), and a one-story house for himself and his wife in Easthampton,
New York.

Bunshaft was the son of immigrants from Russia and attended public schools in
Buffalo, New York, before receiving his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in architecture
from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). It was there that several of the
younger instructors showed him the new forms, generated in Europe by Le Corbusier,
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, among others. Bunshaft found their work
inspiring, but did not execute mere copies of their works; instead, he adapted European
ideas to the specific circumstances of American commissions that differed in type,
materials, location, and legal constraints. With the help of a Rotch Traveling Fellowship
from MIT, Bunshaft visited Europe for several months in 1935—36, and then sought work
in New York City. After working briefly for Edward Durell Stone, Raymond Loewy, and
other practitioners, he secured a position in 1937 with the young firm of Skidmore,
Owings and Merrill. Louis Skidmore’s experience in exhibition design secured work for
his firm at the World’s Fair of 1939, and the firm expanded rapidly thereafter. Bunshaft
returned to the office in New York, after serving in several branches of the military
(1942-46), and became a partner in the firm in 1946.

Bunshaft’s work on such varied projects as Manhattan House, a large apartment house
in New York City, and the Fort Hamilton Veterans’ Administration Hospital in Brooklyn,
is characterized by a taste for geometric form, siting to enhance both efficiency and
amenity, refined proportion, and attention to landscaping and ground-level amenity.
These characteristics reappeared at Lever House (New York), a modestly sized corporate
headquarters that was the first glass box, commercial office building in the city. During
the next decade, Bunshaft designed other buildings that often appeared delicate despite
their substantial size, including the glass-walled branch bank for the Manufacturers’ Trust
Company in Manhattan, the Connecticut General Life Insurance Company (1957) in
Bloomfield, Connecticut, and the Reynolds Metals Company headquarters (1958) in
Richmond, Virginia, where the company’s aluminum formed a substantial part of the
exterior surface.

During the 1960s, Bunshaft’s style included attention to dramatic structure, with large
boxlike buildings supported on small pin joints; the Beinecke Library is one example of
the style, and another is the American Republic Life Insurance Company headquarters
(1965) in Des Moines, Iowa. At this time, he used concrete more often than glass and
metal, but continued his intense interest in designing the thinnest possible metal and glass
curtain walls, as he used at 140 Broadway (1967) in New York City.


The taste for dramatic buildings continued into the 1970s, with
sometimes-clumsy results, as in the Hirshhorn Museum. The museum is a
doughnut-shaped building that attempted to mediate between the disparate
shapes of neighboring museums. By contrast, praise abounded for his
National Commercial Bank (Jeddah) where he ingeniously placed
multistory openings on a prismatic, largely blank building, allowing partly
cooled air to help ventilate the office tower in a hot, dry climate. The
Tefloncovered tents at the terminal in Jeddah for the pilgrims to the

National Commercial Bank, Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia, designed by Gordon
Bunshaft (1983)

© Zouheir A.-Hashem

annual Haj, earned universal admiration, providing as they do, an elegant, airy solution to
climatic and social problems.

These buildings are too intricate to have been designed by one person, and Bunshaft
acknowledged his debts to his administrative partners as well as to his design assistants

and engineers. His architectural colleagues included William S.Brown, J.Walter
Severinghaus, Natalie de Blois, and Sherwood A.Smith. A practical person who was
interested in specific situations rather than in theory, Bunshaft was a man of great energy,
a decisive decision-maker with a habit of blunt speech, and a man of fundamental
honesty.

His interests in landscaping and in the placement of works of modern art inside and
outside the firm’s buildings are lesserknown aspects of his work, but they were essential
to his idea of good architecture. He favored the sculpture of Henry Moore, Joan Miré,
Alberto Giacometti, and Isamu Noguchi, whose works were in the private collection that
he and his wife willed to New York’s Museum of Modern Art. His collection included
paintings by Miré and Jean Dubuffet and modest examples of African sculpture.

His building designs earned him 12 First Honor awards from the American Institute of
Architects, the Gold Medal of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters,
and the Pritzker Prize, which he shared with Oscar Niemeyer.

CAROL HERSELLE KRINSKY

Gropius, Walter (Germany); Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard)
(France); Lever House, New York; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig
(Germany); Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United States)

Biography

Born in Buffalo, New York, 9 May 1909. Earned bachelor’s degree, 1933; master’s
degree, 1935 in architecture, both at Massachusetts Institute of Technology; toured
Europe and northern Africa on a Rotch Traveling Fellowship 1935-37. Married Nina
Elizabeth Wayler 1943. Chief designer, New York office 1937-42 Skidmore and
Owings, later Skidmore, Owings and Merrill; served in United States Army Corps of
Engineers 1942-46; partner Skidmore, Owings and Merrill 1946-83; member, the
President’s Commission on the Fine Arts 1963-72. Visiting critic, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology 1940-42; visiting critic, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 1954-60; visiting critic, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 1959-
62; trustee, Museum of Modern Art, New York from 1975; trustee, Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania from 1977. Fellow, American Institute of
Architects; fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences; academician, National
Academy of Design; honorary member, Buffalo Fine Arts Academy, New York 1962;
honorary professor, Universidad Nacional Federico Villareal, Lima, Peru 1977; awarded
Pritzker Prize (shared with Oscar Niemeyer) 1988. Died in New York, 6 August 1990.

Selected Works

Venezuelan Pavilion, World’s Fair, New York, 1939
Lever House Corporate Headquarters, New York, 1952
Manufacturers Hannover Trust Bank Branch Headquarters, New York, 1954
Hilton Hotel (with Sedad Hakki Eldem), Istanbul, 1955

Connecticut General Life Insurance Company Office Building, Bloomfield, 1957
Reynolds Metals Company Building, Richmond, Virginia, 1958
Chase Manhattan Bank, New York, 1961
Albright-Knox Art Gallery (addition), Buffalo, New York, 1962
Beinecke Library, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, 1963
Banque Lambert Building, Brussels, 1965
American Republic Insurance Company Building, Des Moines, Iowa, 1965
Marine Midland Building, 140 Broadway, New York, 1967
American Can Company Suburban Corporate Headquarters, Greenwich, Connecticut,
1970
Lyndon Johnson Presidential Library (with Brooks Barr Graeber and White), Austin,
Texas, 1971
W.R.Grace Building, 1114 Avenue of the Americas, New York, 1973
Philip Morris Cigarette Manufacturing Plant, Richmond, Virginia, 1974
Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C., 1974
National Commercial Bank, Jeddah, 1983
Haj Terminal, Jeddah International Airport (with Fazlur Khan), Saudi
Arabia, 1985

Selected Publication

“25-year Award Goes to Lever House,” (March 1980)

Further Reading
Bush-Brown, Albert, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983
Danz, Ernst, translated by Emst van Haagen, New York: Praeger, and London:
Architectural Press, 1962
Krinsky, Carol Herselle, New York: Architectural History Foundation, and
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1988
Menges, Axel, translated by E.Rockwell, New York: Architectural Book, and

London: Architectural Press, 1974

BUREAUX D’ETUDES HENRI
CHOMETTE

Architecture firm, France and West Africa

The Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette were architectural firms created in 1949 by
Henri Chomette, a French-born architect who established himself in Africa ten years
before the independence achievements.

Active in Africa from 1949 until 1993 and concentrated in Francophone West Africa
(Senegal, Ivory Coast, Burkina Faso, Benin, and Togo) and central Africa (Cameroon and
Gabon), the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette in 50 years gained a sustained reputation
based on the contribution of African architects, engineers, craftsmen, and artists in the
building of modern African states.

Born in Saint-Etienne (a city near Lyon), Henri Chomette (1921-95) developed early a
passion for architecture. A student of Tony Garnier in Lyon (1941-45), Othello
Zavaronni, and Gustave Perret at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris (1945-46), Chomette
earned his degree in architecture in 1946. An admirer of Le Corbusier and intern in his
atelier de la rue de Sévres 35 in Paris, Chomette rapidly gained recognition as a major
architect for the Reconstruction period after World War II throughout his practice in
Paris, Le Havre, and Lille. In France, the difficult period of Reconstruction with
“normalized architecture” and the takeover of geometers and engineers in the
architectural project limited architects’ initiative, creativity, and control over their
projects for public buildings.

In 1948 Chomette won an international architectural competition for Haile Selassie’s
Imperial Palace in Ethiopia. The competition, organized by the International Association
of Architects (UIA) in Paris, gave Chomette the opportunity to access another continent
with major potentiality in terms of urban planning, architecture, and project management.
Although never built, the Imperial Palace in Addis-Ababa nevertheless gave Chomette an
official entrance to Ethiopia and to the African continent. In Ethiopia Chomette was
commissioned for public buildings such as theaters, housing projects, the State Bank of
Ethiopia (1949-53), and the Headquarters of the Organization of African Unity (1963).
Appointed major urban planner, he also developed urban grids (1953) for the city of
Addis-Ababa. He then moved to West Africa, where he established and managed
architectural firms for more than 45 years.

As a liberal private-sector architect unlike his contemporaries (who were primarily
salaried-employees paid by the French government and working temporarily in Africa),
Chomette depended entirely on public and private commissions to manage his firms and
pay his collaborators. Architectural firms connected to the private sector, the Bureaux
d’Etudes Henri Chomette represented a body of professionals from architects to
economists, from draftsmen to craftsmen, who autonomously managed the totality of the
projects in any country in which they practiced.

Another fact differentiated architects working for the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri
Chomette from their peers: their originality in reflecting and respecting African cultures,

architectural patrimony, and environment in all steps of the projects, from beginning to
finalization. In opposition to many practitioners of the time, who merely transplanted
European architectural epitomes derived from the International Style and from all types
of revivals (including classical, Normand, and Provengal), Chomette and his colleagues
intensively produced both a local and a modern architecture considering cultures and
their environment. In their quest for authenticity through simplicity, all partners of the
Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette clearly understood that modern architecture in Africa
needed use technology in order to serve social values and to suit popular needs.

Romanticized imagery about giant thatch-roofed cabins in the middle of a modern
city, as well as out-of-place urban-planning theories derived from “masters” such as Le
Corbusier were not apropos in the architectural repertoire and agenda of Chomette’s
firms. The latter offered an African alternative based on society, economy, and
technology during transitional periods preceding and following the independence
processes.

Numerous projects in the heart of capitals such as Dakar, Abidjan, Niamey, Lome, and
Cotonou, and in secondary cities are attributed to the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette.
Their activity included urban planning, housing projects, public administrations,
embassies, hospitals, schools, transportation, hotels, banks, private residences, and
industrial buildings and structures.

The following buildings and structures cover only an infinitesimal portion
of the substantial contributions of the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette
in African architectural and urban landscapes: State Bank of Ethiopia
(1953), City Hall of Abidjan (1956), National Palace of Benin (1963),
Nour-Al-Hayat Mall (1965) in Abidjan, French Embassy (1966) in

Ouagadougou,

National Saving Bank of Yaounde (1973), Charles de Gaulle Bridge (1967) in Abidjan,
Department of Finances Building (1976) in Abidjan, Ivorian Society of Bank (SIB; 1976)
in Abidjan, the Yopougon and Williamsville dwellings (1975) in Abidjan, and the School
of Librarians (1980) in Dakar.

Similarities can be seen between the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette’s early works
in the 1950s and the later ones in the 1990s. Some of these concepts greatly influenced
new generations of African architects, such as Abou Koffi, Andree Diop, and Habib
Diene, who acknowledged the pioneering and quintessential work of the Bureaux
d’Etudes Henri Chomette. Major innovations and concepts include the following:

SOS Children’s Village International,
Dakar, Senegal, designed by Henri
Chomette in collaboration with Thierry
Melot (1979)

Photo courtesy Bureaux d’Etudes Henri
Chomette © Aga Khan Trust for Culture

1. Integration of cultural features and
connections referring to the
population concerned in the concept,
design, spatial organization, and
aesthetics of public and private
buildings (the stairway of honor of
the National Palace of Benin in
Cotonou [1963] consisted of several

royal insignias and seals of Abomey,
former capital of the kingdom of
Dahomey)

2. Use of local materials and modern
techniques

3. Structural transformation of
buildings (for the City Hall of
Abidjan built in 1956, the facade was
composed of revolving wooden
panels for natural ventilation that
later were turned into a revolving
thermal double glazing in the 1970s)

4. Partnership with African
craftsmen, artisans, and artists in all
steps of the projects

5. Integration of Plastic Arts into the
architectural project

One observes the longevity of the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette through a solid
local structure and independent management, the knowledge and enforcement of all the

rules connected with building markets throughout West Africa, and the quality of
economically realistic and culturally oriented projects.

The quintessential partnership with local architects, engineers, craftsmen, and artists
reinforced the cultural identity of the architectural work of the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri
Chomette, whose existence and expression served primarily Africans by defining and
designing a modern architecture completely African in its concept and its destination.

DIALA TOURE

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France)

Biography

Born in Saint-Etienne, near Lyon in France, 1921; son of an established craftsman.
Attended the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Lyon; studied under Tony Garnier, 1941-45, Moved
to Paris in 1945 and studied under Othello Zavaronni and Gustave Perret at the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts, Paris, 1945-46. Major Architect for the Reconstruction, active in
independent practice, Paris from 1947. Won international competition for Imperial Palace
in Ethiopia 1948. Moved to Ethiopia 1949. Created and managed the Bureaux d’Etudes
Henri Chomette 1949-93. Appointed major architect and urban planner for the city of
Addis-Ababa 1953-59. Appointed architect and urban planner for the Upper-Volta
government 1961-66. Gave numerous lectures in African Universities and Schools of
Architecture. Published several influential works in 1964, 1992, 1995. Exhibited
at several national and international exhibitions including Expo °67, Montreal, 1967,
Bouake, 1970. Died in Saint-Etienne, 1995.

Selected Works

Many of the buildings built by the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette are still in use
today. Some that are well kept, such as the City Hall of Abidjan, Department of Finances
Building in Abidjan, and National Palace of Benin, underwent major reconstruction over
the years; others, such as the Ivorian Society of Bank, lost their original value after
technical problems caused the deterioration of their main facades.

State Bank of Ethiopia, Addis-Ababa, 1953

City Hall of Abidjan, 1956

National Palace of Benin, Cotonou, 1963

Nour-Al-Hayat Mall, Abidjan, 1965

French Embassy in Ouagadougou, 1966

Charles de Gaulle Bridge, Abidjan, 1967

National Saving Bank of Yaounde, 1973

Yopougon and Williamsville dwellings, Abidjan, 1975

Department of Finances Building in Abidjan, 1976

Ivorian Society of Bank (SIB), Abidjan, 1976
School of Librarians, SOS Children’s Village International (with Thierry

Melot), Dakar, 1979

Selected Publications

(November 1964) (special issue on modern architecture)
edited by Institut Francais d’ Architecture, 1992
1995

Further Reading

The works of the Bureaux d’Etudes Henri Chomette were published in many
international architecture magazines and in general publications about Architecture in
Africa.
Bedarida, Marc, “L’influence fran¢aise: Du rayonnement des Beaux-Arts au repli
hexagonal,” 430 (1997)
Chapier, Francois, “Cotonou: Le Nouveau Centre et le Palais de la République,” 115
(1964)
Christin, Olivier, and Armelle Filliat, “Abidjan: Un urbanisme capital,” in edited by
Maurice Culot and Jean-Marie Thiveaud, Liége: Mardaga, 1992
Depret, Roland, Dakar: Aga Khan Program for Islamic Architecture, 1983
Dione, Mareme, “Dakar au fil des plans,” in edited by Maurice Culot and Jean-Marie
Thiveaud, Li¢ge: Mardaga, 1992
Kultermann, Udo, Paris: Morancé, 1963
Rambert, Charles, “Tourisme et loisirs: Réalisations du Bureau d’ Etudes Henri
Chomette,” 70 (1957)

BURLE MARX, ROBERTO 1909-94

Landscape Architect, Brazil

Roberto Burle Marx was born in Sao Paulo, Brazil, on 9 August 1909. A painter,
muralist, sculptor, designer, architect, botanist, and landscape architect, Burle Marx is
said to be the greatest single influence on gardens since the development of the English
tradition in the 18th century.

The son of a wealthy family of European descent (his father Wilhem was born in
Trier, the same city as Karl Marx), Burle Marx moved with his family to Rio de Janeiro,
where he was educated in music and the arts from an early age. Before entering the
Brazilian School of Beaux Arts (ENBA) in 1930, Burle Marx spent two years in Europe,
mainly in Germany. There, in an encounter that would influence his whole life, he fell in
love with Brazilian native plants in a botanical museum. Not yet valued by the Brazilian
elite, which at that time saw themselves as Europeans in the tropics, the Brazilian flora
impressed the young Burle Marx. It is worth noting that in the 19th century, Brazilian
cities imported plants and tree species for its gardens, following a tradition started by the
Portuguese king Joéo VI when he moved to Rio de Janeiro in 1808 and founded the

(botanical garden) the following year. Burle Marx had traveled to dive into European
culture, and instead he found his own. Returning to Brazil, he had as a mentor Henrique
Melo Barreto, head of Rio’s botanical garden.

At the ENBA, Burle Marx got in touch with a generation of extraordinary colleagues
like Jorge Moreira, Carlos Leéo, Luis Nunes, Affonso Reidy, and Oscar Niemeyer, under
the advice of Laicio Costa. Named director of the ENBA in 1930, Costa had changed the
whole curriculum from one that was highly classical to one that introduced the methods
and ideas of Le Corbusier and the Bauhaus. Despite its modernist inclinations, however,
the ENBA did not reject its faith in drawing as an important part of the process, and Burle
Marx would profit from both the rigor of academic sketching and the freedom of
modernist composition.

After graduating in 1934, Marx moved to Recife, in the Brazilian northeast, with the
task of supervising the renovation of the city’s parks and public squares. A few works
remain from this period, in which he mainly rebuilt gardens that already existed but, for
the first time, introduced native plants into those compositions. In the northeast, he
developed more and more his love for documenting, researching, and collecting native
Brazilian plants—a task that he would continue through his whole life.
Returning to Rio in 1937, he was invited by Costa to collaborate on the gardens for the
Ministry of Education (MES) building. A landmark of Brazilian modernism and one of
the first high-rises to be built in accordance with Le Corbusier’s “Five Points,” the MES
building had the French master himself as a consultant. After that, Burle Marx designed
and executed a series of gardens that are landmarks of Brazilian modern architecture and
almost always associated with a building by one of his colleagues. In Belo Horizonte, he
designed the gardens around the Pampulha buildings (by Oscar Niemeyer) in 1942; in
Rio, the garden in front of the airport (by Roberto brothers) in 1952 and the gardens
around the Modern Art Museum (by Affonso Reidy) and the whole — sea shore park in
954-56.

Burle Marx used the topography as a field of work and integrated nature and building
in a way that was unknown in Brazil, which was accustomed to the Iberian tradition of
separation between city and nature. With an extensive knowledge of the plants’ life
cycles, especially those of the native flora, Burle Marx organized his gardens with natural
elements the same way other artists worked on canvas with paint and brush. His creations
were always multifaceted, and in his gardens he had a unique ability to anticipate the
mature and organic three-dimensional composition from the plan only.

After designing exuberant gardens that represent the best of Brazilian architecture of
the 1950s, Burle Marx also worked in Brasilia at the Foreign Affairs Ministry and the
Army ministry (1965) and in Rio at the State Oil Company (1969) and the Xerox
Building (1980). His most publicized landscape project might be the sidewalk and
arborization of the Copacabana beach (1970). Many of his gardens in Brazil are now
protected by federal and state conservation offices, and the firm Burle Marx and Cia
continues his legacy. Burle Marx also worked outside the boundaries of Brazil and
designed the sidewalks and gardens of Biscayne Boulevard in Miami, Florida, and the
Ciudad del Este Park in Caracas, Venezuela. In close collaboration with other Brazilian
outstanding modernist architects and in full compliance with Costa’s intellectual idea of
bridging the local and the universal, the modern and the antique, Burle Marx left an


impressive body of work, unsurpassed by any other landscape designer of the 20th
century.
FERNANDO LARA
Bo Bardi, Lina (Brazil); Brasilia, Brazil; Costa, Lucio (Brazil);
Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil); Pampulha Buildings, Belo Horizonte, Brazil;
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Further Reading
Adams, William, (exhib. cat.), New York: MoMA, 1991
Bruand, Yves, Sado Paulo: Perspective 1981

Eliovson, Sima, New York: Harry Abrams: Sagapress, 1991
Lemos, Carlos A.C., | Sao Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1979

BURNHAM, DANIEL H. 1846-1912

Architect, United States

Daniel Hudson Burnham’s directive to “make no small plans” remains a fitting
summary for a man whose life and work was defined by the expansion, growth, and
prosperity of well-to-do Americans in the decades that surround the turn of the 20th
century. Not only did Burnham house businessmen and statesmen who drove the
American commercial and political engine to its unmatched expansion, but he also
defined and gave architectural expression to the building types and urban forms they
brought to life.

Burnham was born into a family of modest means in rural New York. In 1855 his
family moved to Chicago, drawn by the thriving new city’s opportunities. At first,
seeking his fortune elsewhere, Burnham made unsuccessful attempts to get an Ivy League
education, mine for silver in the West, and run for public office in the late 1860s. Upon
returning to Chicago, Burnham fell into architecture, rather than having been led by a
muse to express himself in built form. From the start, Burnham saw architecture as a
business opportunity. After working briefly for a series of architectural offices that
included Loring and Jenney in 1872, Burnham settled in with Carter Drake and Wight,
where he met John Wellborn Root. In the following year, the two men channeled their
complementary interests and talents into opening their own firm. Root was more
aesthetically inclined and detail oriented, and became the firm’s primary designer,
whereas Burnham’s organizational and social skills were directed toward business
matters and planning efforts.

Their first projects were residences for wealthy Chicagoans, and were characterized by
an affinity for period styles and historical eclecticism. They included a house in 1874 for
stockyard mogul John B.Sherman that was built on fashionable Prairie Avenue. This
project was essential to Burnham’s later development and professional life, and offered


him access to the board-rooms of high-powered patrons; it became his social entrée to
dinner parties following his marriage to Sherman’s daughter. From this point, Burnham
and Root were catapulted into the elite social and business circles in Chicago.

His patrons enhanced Burnham’s natural inclination toward the entrepreneurial.
Declaring that he was “not going to stay satisfied with houses,” Burnham envisioned
assembling a “big business to handle big things, deal with big businessman, and to build
up a big organization, for you can’t handle big things unless you have an organization”
(Hines, 1974). His growing firm focused on office-building projects, for which Burnham
laid out the plans, and they soon became the standard for this new building type; Root
was responsible for the detailed designs. Burnham’s functional, utilitarian designs were
based largely on H, U, or square plans accommodating interior light wells, while
exposing a maximum amount of the exterior walls to light and air. Their 11-story
Rookery Building (1887) is a square plan with one double-loaded corridor wrapping a
central light court; all of its offices opened onto either this court or the exterior. The
efficient plan was matched by an innovative, iron-curtain, wall structure not evident
under the building’s brick and terracotta shell, articulated into five heavy layers, with a
profusion of neo-Romanesque ornament. In contrast, the recently restored internal
court—a delicate web of cast- and wrought-iron skylights and cantilevered stairways—is
a dazzling display of late-19th-century building technology.

Whereas the Rookery showed indebtedness to 19th-century historicism, another office
building constructed in the following decade pointed toward the future. The Reliance
Building (1894) eschewed overt historical detail in favor of a more utilitarian, functional,
structure-expressing language for which the Chicago School is well known. The 14-story
steel frame was wrapped in fireproof terra-cotta and expressed clearly on the building
facade through the slender, ribbonlike spandrels that wrap each story at floor level,
leaving the greatest proportion of the facade open to glazing. Delicate foliate patterns in
the terra-cotta and the building’s original projecting cornice hearken to past traditions.
However, the startling quantity of glass, the sparkling whiteness of the glazed spandrels
with their pronounced horizontality, and the removal of vertical structural members from
the facade foretold a new spirit in office-building design: a functional, honest expression
of the structure that would reach fulfillment in the next century. Burnham’s office
buildings contributed to the development of the new building type, improving function
and comfort. Whatever the outward expression of these buildings, their decorous designs
made them impressive members of the urban landscape, suggestive of the growing wealth
and prestige of their patrons, and the importance of the activities within their walls.
With Root’s unexpected death in 1891, Burnham was forced to form other
partnerships; the firm’s name changed to D.H. Burnham and Co. and later to Graham
Burnham and Company. Each firm built on the original Burnham and Root model, with
Burnham overseeing every part of an increasingly hierarchical and specialized structure.
Adopted from the world of business, this approach led architectural practice away from
the atelierbased system, and toward the now common architectural practice. By 1910
Burnham’s was the largest architectural firm in the world, with 180 employees, branch
offices in New York and San Francisco, and buildings rising from Houston to London.
Burnham was long an advocate for professionalism in architecture, and he lobbied for
professional rights and served the American Institute of Architects (AIA) as president in
the 1890s.


His growing fame and prominence in social and professional circles made Burnham an
appropriate choice to direct the architectural planning of the World’s Columbian
Exposition of 1893 held in Chicago. It was not only a fair; the exposition was a city in
miniature and inaugurated Burnham’s practice as an urban planner. As director, Burnham
took control of virtually every aspect including the hiring of workers, laborers, artists,
and architects, and overseeing their work and the construction of all buildings. Burnham
led the team of prominent architects in arranging a series of buildings around a
centralized Court of Honor. To encourage harmony among the designs in response to the
classical taste shared by many of the Ecole-trained architects, the committee agreed to a
uniform cornice height and a classical vocabulary for their individual buildings, which
were to be grouped around the central Court of Honor. References to imperial and
Renaissance Rome, Versailles, and post-Haussmann Paris were manifest in the fair’s long
axial boulevards, water elements, and monumental classical architecture. Although a
variety of building styles were employed in the peripheral buildings, it was the images of
the Court of Honor that made the fair famous, and influenced city planning afterward.

Aesthetics were not all that concerned Burnham in the planning of the Columbian
Exposition. Although it was to be temporary, the grounds were needed to operate like a
small-scale city: electrical, steam, gas, water supply, sewage, and transportation all had to
be accommodated, which further prepared Burnham for the practical considerations of
city planning. However, in this case, other urban challenges were conspicuously absent.
For example, there were no slums, and no housing at all was designed or was to be
included. Many questioned the appropriateness of this model for real, working cities, and
it was deemed irrelevant by later historians and critics. However, the fair was enormously
successful with the thousands of visitors who flocked to it, as well as the city officials
across the country that were moved to inject some of the model into their own
municipalities.

Following the success of the fair, Burnham’s well-known administrative
and planning skills were in great demand at the turn of the century. His
most prominent commission was the Washington Plan of 1902. It was
prompted by the capital city’s centennial, renewed hope and prosperity
following the depression of the mid-1890s, and the conclusion of the
Spanish-American war. The plan began as a revival of Pierre Charles
L’Enfant’s 1793 scheme, ftom which departures had been made for time-
and cost-saving reasons. The design team (Burnham and other alumni of

the Columbian Exposition) studied such

Interior (waiting room), Union Station,
Washington, D.C., designed by Daniel
Burnham (1907)

© Historic American Buildings
Survey/Library of Congress

precedents as Paris, Rome, and Versailles, focusing their attention on the Mall area. The
main axes of the original plan had been abandoned with the placement of the Washington
Monument. Burnham’s reconfigured Mall disguised this imperfection by redrawing the
axes to meet at the Monument. Burnham cleansed the Mall of its previous functions as
pasture, lumberyard, and railroad center, making it a wide swath of elm-lined green
space, bordered by cultural institutions. Office blocks and parks were planned for prime
locations nearby. The next four administrations drew from Burnham’s plan the
groundwork for future development in Washington, and architects followed his precepts
for layout and style. Significant additions to Washington that remained in keeping with
the plan include Henry Bacon’s Lincoln Memorial (1912), John Russell Pope’s National
Gallery of Art, and Burnham’s Union Station (1907). Burnham’s classicized plan for the
capital—successor to and embodiment of the fulfillment of the westward march—suited
the nation’s cultural and political vision.

Burnham’s plans for Cleveland (1903) and San Francisco (1905) proved, on smaller
scale, the national influence of his city-planning ideals. His vision affected foreign
countries as well; in 1904 Burnham designed the colonial Philippine cities of Manila and
Baguio. These designs also paid homage to Beaux-Arts planning, with the city grid cut by
diagonal boulevards and dotted with a citywide park system. However, within this
imported framework, Burnham preserved local Spanish-Philippine building traditions. As
such, his urban plans encourage comparison with other early-20th-century imperial
capital planning, such as Sir Edwin Lutyens’s design for the Viceroy’s House (1913) in


New Delhi, where Mogul and Buddhist features meld into an otherwise abstractly
classical design.

No urban scheme of Burnham’s was as sweeping as his Chicago Plan of 1909. Here,

he accepted the challenge that included not only a city center or fairgrounds, but a
complete city. Taking only the most general clues from the existing street grid and
akeshore, Burnham reorganized the city into a 20-mile-long recreational, lakefront park,
backed by virtually endless commercial districts, with consistent cornice heights
punctuated by interior parks. The existing grid of streets was improved functionally and
aesthetically, railroad terminals were regrouped for better communication and reduced
industrial sprawl, and the Chicago River was straightened for more effective water and
riverside transportation. A great domed civic center dominated the skyline; from it, radia
boulevards reached into the suburbs miles away.
While the Chicago Plan’s aesthetics are often noted—particularly the seeming
incongruence of Burnham’s Beaux-Arts imposition on the existing industrial, commercial
nature of the jagged city, a consistency remains with his earlier vision, to ennoble the
businessman and his commercial empire. Burnham’s Chicago was a commercia.
enterprise, aggrandized in a way that lent recognition to commercial activity as Chicago’s
primary cultural export. As early as the mid-1890s, Burnham had revealed the genesis of
the plan as the city’s moneymaking potential: an improved physical structure would
increase productivity and wealth, and a fine-looking city would encourage the spending
of travel dollars at home rather than abroad. Burnham’s optimistic and, ultimately
unrealistic vision, populated it with wealthy and successful business leaders with little
room for anyone else. Even so, the grandeur of Burnham’s vision directed much of
Chicago’s development in coming years: his double-decker boulevard was built as
Wacker Drive, Michigan Avenue, was broadened in the 1920s, and various lakefront
amenities were constructed in a landfill along the shore, now known as Grant Park.

Burnham’s plans served the society that he knew best: the industrialists and politicians
who endeavored to improve society through cultural gifts. With honorary degrees from
Harvard, Yale, and Northwestern; membership in exclusive social and business clubs;
extensive foreign travel; and a supporter of the arts, Burnham was among the elite of the
architectural profession, who could afford to live as their clients did. Just as businessmen
presented the city with museums and libraries, Burnham gave the gift of his talents to the
people. Most of the city plans he completed were presented free of charge. Although
some might judge this beneficence as misguided, Burnham was convinced of
architecture’s role in the improvement of society. In he described the plan of
Washington as complementary to the reformation called for among progressive
politicians. He believed that aesthetic unity among buildings encouraged social harmony.
He felt the ennobling forms of classical architecture were a language meant to uplift the
populace, and express the strength and permanency of the political and social order. In
his report for the Cleveland Plan, he wrote that the “jumble of buildings” present in most
cities disturbed social peace. Architectural uniformity and harmony, as seen in ancient
cities of the world, would encourage social harmony in modern America.

Attitudes about Burnham changed radically after his death in 1912. While once he was
regarded as a powerful visionary, by the 1920s he was decried as a megalomaniac.
During the 1930s, the threat of Fascism and its orderly, uniform architecture brought a
chill to reviews of his grand designs. The aesthetic of classicism fell out of favor as


modernism swept through the architectural academies and journals, and the few who
discussed Burnham did so with derision, grieving his renunciation of the honest
architecture of the Chicago School to follow classical, elitist, historicist, and irrelevant
flights of fancy. Recent years have been kinder to Burnham, bringing an increased
appreciation for the role of ornament in architecture after mid-century. It has lead to a
reevaluation of Burnham’s career. During the 1970s, the first serious biography of
Burnham was written, as were a flurry of dissertations on his work and planning. His
many contributions to architecture are appreciated today. Burnham’s role in the
development of the skyscraper, the planning of the modern office building, and city-
planning concepts that were employed throughout the United States affects nearly every
architectural office in operation today.

JHENNIFER A.AMUNDSON

Chicago School; Flatiron Building, New York; Holabird, William, and

John Wellborn Root (United States); Lutyens, Edwin (Great Britain); Plan

of Chicago

Biography

Born in Henderson, New York, 4 September 1846. Attended Chicago city schools;
studied with a private tutor in Bridgewater, Massachusetts; apprentice in the office of
Loring and Jenney, Chicago. Married Margaret Sherman: 5 children; sons Hubert and
Daniel Jr. became architects and joined their father’s firm. Entered large mercantile
house, Chicago 1868; partnership with Laureau; draftsman, Carter Drake and Wight,
Chicago 1872; partner in Burnham and Root with John Wellborn Root 1873-91; opened
own office, Chicago 1891; directed the architectural planning of the World’s Columbian
Exposition, Chicago 1893; appointed chairman of the Commission of Fine Arts,
Washington, D.C. 1910. Member, Chicago chapter, American Institute of Architects
1884; fellow, American Institute of Architects 1887; president, American Institute of
Architects 1894. Died in Heidelberg, Germany, 1 June 1912.

Selected Works

Allin Chicago unless otherwise noted
Burnham and Root:
Sherman House, 1874
Montauk Building, 1882
Rookery Building, 1887
Rand-MeNally Building, 1890
Monadnock Building, 1890
D.H.Burnham and Company:
Reliance Building, 1894
Frick Building, Pittsburgh, 1901
Marshall Field Retail Store, 1902
First National Bank, 1903


Fuller (Flatiron) Building, New York, 1903
Railway Exchange Building, 1903

Union Station, Washington, D.C. 1907
Orchestra Hall, 1905

Wanamaker’s Store, Philadelphia, 1909

Claridge Hotel, New York, 1910

Selected Publications

Burnham’s papers are located in the Burnham and Ryerson Library, The Art Institute of
Chicago.
(with Francis Millet), 1894
“How to Set up an Architectural Office Composed of Specialists,” 35 (June 1900)
(with Charles Moore), 1902
“White City and Capital City,’ 63 (February 1902)
(with John M. Carrére and Arnold Brunner), 1903
(with Edward F.O’Day), 1905
(with Edward Benett and Charles Moore), 1909

Further Reading

Although somewhat dated, the best and most complete work on Burnham to date is
Thomas S.Hines’s . Written by a close friend, Charles Moore’s earlier account of
Burnham’s life and work benefits from intimacy of detail but suffers from a lack of
scholarly discrimination. Jordy and Wiseman cover both Burnham’s 19th- and 20th-
century work.
Elliott, Thomas R., “Daniel Burnham: A Consistent Classicist,” 4 (1977)
Field, Cynthia R., “The City Planning of Daniel Hudson Burnham” (Ph.D. diss.)
Columbia University, 1974

Hines, Thomas S., New York: Oxford University Press, 1974
Jordy, William H., Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1972
Moore, Charles, New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1921
Wiseman, Carter, New York: Norton, 1998

BUS TERMINAL

The coming of the automobile resulted in new building types that met the needs of
motorized America, such as the filling station and motor lodge. In the early 20th century,
the arrival of bus travel also initiated the construction of a new building type, the bus
terminal. Although the architectural style of bus terminals has changed dramatically since

their development in the early 1930s, their function and general program has remained
relatively unaltered.

Early bus terminals typically included features found in rail stations, such as waiting
areas and ticket offices; however, some architects viewed bus terminals as mysterious
new building types that required analysis and evaluation. In the 1930s, seemingly
rudimentary suggestions about bus terminal design were available from magazines such
as and
Unlike rail stations, however, early bus terminals also required a loading
balcony or platform to reach the rooftop luggage racks. By the late 1930s,
buses had luggage compartments below the cabin floor, thus removing the
need for loading balconies. Nonetheless, bus stations had to incorporate
properly designed platforms that could accommodate several arriving and
departing buses per day. As a result, the creation of a functional bus
platform was a key concern for many architects. Contemporary
professional magazines such as __ illustrated different types of bus
platforms for uncertain architects. These early-20th-century platform
designs, such as the island-

Greyhound bus station, in the
streamlined art style, Louisville,
Kentucky (1938)

© Library of Congress

and-wheel types, continue to be used with contemporary bus terminals.
Architects of early-20th-century bus terminals employed a style that was consciously
different from rail stations. During this period, some architects believed that bus travel

could assert its viability through a standardized architectural presence with value as an
advertising medium. The desire for stylistic uniformity resulted in the use of an art
modeme or “streamlined” style, a manner influenced by contemporary industrial designs.
From 1930 to 1950, most American bus stations employed the common elements of art
modeme (or Deco), such as curved corners, semicircular window bays, and smooth
surfaces. Like trains and automobiles, streamlined bus stations also used aerodynamic
movement and efficient, modern services: a new dynamic building for a new dynamic
form of travel. The New York Terminal for the Greyhound Lines (1935) is an excellent
example of this newly developed building type and correlative imagery. Designed by
Thomas W.Lamb, its curved walls, wraparound facade, rounded windows, and sleek
materials epitomized bus terminal architecture in the early and mid-20th century.

Despite the bus terminal’s clean, modern style, delays due to traffic and road
conditions compromised its efficiency, and poor maintenance and clumsy designs
undermined its appeal. Soon, bus stations were considered dark, dank, and inefficient
shelters that catered to passengers “who are automatically marked down as second class
citizens” (Dawson, 2000). In the second half of the 20th century, bus terminals lost their
streamlined style but retained their dreary quality.

During the mid-20th century, attempts were made to transform the bus terminal’s
image from an uninviting and dangerous place to a modern and safe transit center. As a
result, many bus terminals began incorporating expansive bus platform canopies that
sheltered open, well-lit, and safe spaces. These elaborate canopies, which were normally
supported by daring and intricate truss designs, achieved a sculptural quality and were
sometimes the principal means of architectural expression. For example, New York
City’s George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal (1962), designed by Pier Luigi Nervi,
was an early bus terminal to implement a dramatic and expressive trussed roof.
Unfortunately, the waiting areas did not receive the same type of innovative architectural
treatment.

Despite new canopy designs, bus terminals continued to be considered inhospitable
and troublesome buildings. During the last two decades of the 20th century, however,
several efforts were made to infuse a sense of safety and modernity to a formerly
lackluster building type. Again, one of the hallmarks of contemporary bus terminals is a
light and expressive canopy that is supported by an extravagant truss system.
Nevertheless, current terminals are also characterized by waiting areas that are simpler
and rely on an extensive use of glass. A recent example is the bus terminal for the North
Greenwich Interchange (1997). Designed by Foster and Partners, the dominant feature is
a sweeping birdlike canopy supported by a forest of metal, treelike members. The
dramatic roof slopes to enclose a waiting area that the architects emphasized as an
uncluttered and “safe, user-friendly environment” (Baillieu, 1998).

Terminals that need to fit within an existing urban fabric sometimes become part of
mixed-use facility. These types of terminals typically resemble a commercial building
more than a high-volume transit center. The Laredo Transit Center (1999) in Laredo,
Texas, is a contemporary example of a mixed-use facility that had to conform to the
city’s urbanism and face a historic town square. Here, the Laredo Transit Center’s
unassuming facade hides a bus station (which serves local and longdistance passengers),
a parking garage, and 16,000 square feet of rentable office space.


Mixed-use bus terminals have been built in urban centers around the world since the
1930s. Similarly, although the architectural style of bus terminals has changed since the
early 20th century, the needs and functions have remained the same. Nonetheless, with a
renewed dedication to constructing efficient and safe bus terminals, many cities will
continue to witness this venerable building type.

MARC PERROTTA.
Art Deco; Nervi, Pier Luigi (Italy); Railroad Station; Transportation

Planning

Further Reading

Baillieu, Amanda, “Gimme Shelter,” 105, no. 7 (1998)
“Bus Terminal: New York Terminal of Greyhound Lines, Thomas W.Lamb, Architect,”
78 (September 1935)
Dawson, Layla, “Civilizing the Bus,” 1240 (June 2000)
Fistere, John C., “Bus Terminal Construction,’ 53 (December 1930)
Fistere, John C., “Bus Terminal Planning,” 53 (December 1930)
ITE Committee 5C-1, “The Location and Design of Bus Transfer Facilities,’ 52, no. 1
(1982)
Moorhead, Gerald, “Plaza Transit,” 50, no. 2 (2000)
“National Trailways Bus Depot, Chicago, Illinois: Graham, Anderson, Probst, and White,
Architects,” 151 (July 1937)
Thomas Lamb, Inc., “The Bus Terminal,” 81 (January 1937)

Melrose Community Center (2000),
view from south garden, Bronx, New
York Designed by Diana Agrest and
Mario Gandelsonas (United States)

© David Sunberg / ESTO. All rights reserved.

Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise (1994)
Kaolack, Senegal

Designed by Patrick Dujarric (France)
© Aga Khan Trust for Culture

Cuadra San Cristébal (1966-68),
Mexico City, Mexico

Designed by Luis Barragan (Mexico)
in collaboration with Andres Casillas
de Alba

Photo by Armando Salas Portugal © Barragan
Foundation, Switzerland/Artists Rights
Society, New York

Arnoff Center for Design and Art
(1996), University of Cincinnati, Ohio

Designed by Peter Eisenmann (United
States)

© Mary Ann Sullivan

Groninger Museum (1993-95),
Groningen, the Netherlands

Designed by Coop Himmelb(Dau
(Austria)

© Margaritha Spiluttini. Photo courtesy Coop
Himmelb(lau

Quadracci Pavilion (2001), Milwaukee
Art Museum, south terrace, view with
wings open, Milwaukee, Wisconsin

Designed by Santiago Calatrava
(Spain)
© Mary Ann Sullivan

Casa Malaparte (1938-40), Capri, Italy

Designed by Adalberto Libera (Italy)
© Roberto Schezen/ESTO. All rights reserved.

Interior Designs of Hill House (ca.
1903), Helensburgh, Scotland

Designed by Charles Rennie
Mackintosh (Scotland)

© Howard Davis/Greatbuildings.com

Casa Mila (“La Pedrera”) (1905-10),
Barcelona, Spain

Designed by Antonio Gaudi (Spain)
© Mary Ann Sullivan


PEALE
Wie, CSR
KK a

AAA

Great Court Interior (1994-2000), The
British Museum, London, England
Designed by Sir Norman Foster and
Partners (Great Britain)

Photo by Nigel Young © Foster and Partners

Sky court of the Guggenheim Museum
(1991-97), Bilbao, Spain

Designed by Frank O.Gehry (United
States)

© Dan Delgado

Eigen Haard Housing Estate (Building
No. 3, corner) (1915-20) Amsterdam,
the Netherlands

Designed by Michel de Klerk
(Netherlands)

© Elisabeth A.Bakker-Johnson

Designed by Theo van Doesburg and
Cornelius van Eesteren

Gouache and ink on paper, sheet,
221/2 x 221/2”

Edgar J.Kaufmann, Jr. Fund.
(149.1947) The Museum of Modern
Art, New York

Digital image © The Museum of Modern Art,
New York/Licensed by Scala/Art Resource,
New York, and Artists Rights Society (ARS),
New York

C

CAIRO, EGYPT

Though best known for its splendid World-Heritage-listed historic monuments, its
inhabited Cities of the Dead (cemeteries), or its contemporary informal peripheries, Cairo
is also a city that has experienced almost all international trends of modernism (in a broad
sense) across the entire 20th century. The phenomenon can be traced back to the 1870s
when an ambitious ruler, Khedive Isma’il (r. 1863-79), known for his passion for
architecture and his will to prove that his country was European rather than African,
decided to transform the Egyptian capital according to the model of Paris.
Within less than a decade, new quarters (the actual city’s center) were created at the
edge of the historical core; streets were cut through the old fabric, and building types
alien to the local context were introduced, starting with a Palace Hotel (1869) by
Christopher G. Wray, an Opera (1869) inspired by La Scala in Milan, apartment buildings
with commercial arcades, and town houses surrounded by gardens in the Second
Empire’s manner. Public parks and promenades, designed by landscape architects with
Parisian experience, as well as a vast spa were built south of the city. The result was far
from resembling Paris, but an enduring pattern was set among the local elite: the
importing of the latest fashions from influential European capitals. Attracted by a
growing market, architects, engineers, and contractors of European origin (mainly
Italians, but also French, Germans, Austrians, and Armenians) began settling in Cairo,
where they more or less reproduced the architecture of their native countries,
occasionally using Moorish and later Mamluk motifs to add some sort of “local” touch to
their constructions.
Both the eagerness of affluent patrons for innovations from abroad and the hegemony
of French and Italian aesthetics continued all through the British occupation (from 1882
to 1922). Building in reinforced concrete started in 1894 and developed quickly. An early
example is the Club des Princes (1899), a private theater designed by the prolific Antonio
Lasciac, the favorite architect of the Khedivial family from 1895 to the late 1920s and
author of a number of princely Italianate palaces still visible today—most of them now
adapted to other uses, such as the administration offices of ‘Ayn Shams University (1902,
restored in 1997), featuring impressive metalwork and a large stained-glass opening in
the Liberty style. Art Nouveau was actually short lived, as elsewhere, but flourished as
well in its French and Belgian versions, while also producing some Secessionist
buildings, among them the Shaarei Hashamaim Synagogue (1907) by Eduard Matasek.
Paradoxically, the British influence appears to have been rather incidental. In residential


architecture, it manifested mainly through some blocks of flats of red brick and Norman-
inspired details, such as the St. David’s building (1912), by Robert Williams, or the
cottage architecture of the garden suburb of Ma’adi (created in 1905).
Italianate villas and Parisian-styled apartment buildings constituted by far the
dominant and lasting model. Department stores were of an unmistakable French
inspiration, be it the luxuriant Orosdi-Back Store (1909) by Raoul Brandon, the Sednaoui
Store (1913) by Georges Pareq (with fine iron skeleton), or the Tiring premises (1914) by
Oskar Horowitz. The major public building of the period, and the first in Cairo for which
an international competition was organized, the Museum of Antiquities (1902), typically
featured a Beaux-Arts design by Marcel Dourgnon.
Yet the most spectacular development of the early decades of the 20th century was the
building, starting in 1907, of the new town of Heliopolis in the eastern desert, 10
kilometers away from the city’s center—and today included in Cairo’s boundaries as one
of its most fashionable residential districts. Initially a speculative development on a large
scale imagined by the Belgian magnate Baron Edouard Empain, the enterprise turned to
erecting a sustainable town, with its own facilities, transportation system, and services,
generous public and open spaces, and varied types of housing intended to accommodate a
large public, from working to upper-middle class. Due to the strict building regulations
and standards of construction imposed by Empain and his architects (among them Emest
Jaspar and Alexandre Marcel), an architectural ensemble of remarkable homogeneity was
achieved, although a variety of stylistic idioms were used: Moorish and Mamluk Revival,
Indian style, French and Italian Renaissance, and Romanesque.
The prosperous 1920s and 1930s were dominated by an exuberant Art
Deco manner, characterized by the extensive use of ornate stuccowork and
elaborate metalwork. One of its best exponents was the firm constituted by
Léon Azema, Max Edrei, and Jacques Hardy. Founded in 1921 by
classmates at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, the firm opened an office
in Cairo after winning the competition for the Mixed Tribunals in 1924
and was extremely active until the completion of the project in 1929:
Among the numerous villas and blocks of flats that it designed in Cairo,
the Nahas villa (1927) and the highly decorated Rabbath Block (1927)
deserve mention. Later examples of French modernism include the elegant
work of Georges Parcq and Auguste Perret and, more largely, numerous
apartment blocks by local architects educated in Paris and strongly
influenced by Michel Roux-Spitz’s or Pol Abraham’s “modern
classicism,” such as Antoine Selim Nahas, Raymond Antonious, and
Charles Ayrout. In contrast, grand public schemes, such as Cairo
University’s campus (1937) by Eric George Newmun and the Qasr al-
’ Ayni hospital (1937) by Charles Nicholas and John Edward Dixon-Spain,
were more in line with the British academic classicism.


Cultural Park for Children (1992),
Cairo, designed by Abdelhalim
1_Abdelhalim

Photo by Barry Iverson
© Aga Khan Award for Architecture

Another significant aspect of the interwar period was the emergence, due to the
Egyptianization policies adopted after independence in 1922, of the first generation of
indigenous professionals. Its initial major concern was the search for a genuine modern
“national style,” combining a contemporary language and references to the country’s
prestigious architectural heritage. Of note, in this respect, are Mustafa Fahmy’s
interesting attempts to synthesize the Pharaonic and Islamic legacies into modern designs,
through using massive volumetry—the actual Museum of Modern Art (1936)—
eventually mixed with Art Deco stylizations of the Mamluk repertoire—the Dar al-
Hikma (Doctors’ Syndicate offices) (1941). In an expanding metropolis that had already
reached 2 million inhabitants by 1937, the following generation, to which belonged
Hasan Fathy as well as active and prominent figures such as Ali Labib Gabr and Mahmud
Ryad, was more involved in planning and housing issues. Responsible for the layout of
the new residential quarters created in 1948 on the left bank of the Nile (Muhandisin),
Ryad also elaborated prototypes of low-density economic housing that were used in three
major schemes of the postwar period: the garden suburbs of Madinat al-Tahrir, Helmiyya
al-Zaytin, and Helwan, totaling 4,000 units completed in 1954. They were succeeded by
radical advocates of the International Style. A leading figure was Sayyid Karim, author of
several early high-rise buildings and, more important, the founder in 1939 of
(Architecture), the first architectural magazine in Arabic, which endeavored to
disseminate the latest developments of the international scene into the Middle East. To
the same generation belong Mustafa Shawqi and Salah Zeitun, both educated in the

United States and claiming influence from Frank Lloyd Wright’s organic architecture;
Cairo International Airport (1961) is among the many projects they designed as partners.
By the late 1950s, few European architects were still practicing in Cairo, and a major
shift of the prevailing architectural references was occurring: Americanism was taking
command.

Whereas Fathy’s and his disciples’ internationally-known researches based on
vernacular models have left almost no mark on Cairo’s landscape and physical
environment, conventional international architecture of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s did
have, in the form of taller and taller apartment towers and hotel blocks, unimaginative
shopping malls, ugly multistoried parking buildings, and cheap public housing schemes.
Quality design and fine execution, as found in the World Trade Center (1988) and
Conrad International Cairo (1999) by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s London office
with Ali Nour El Din Nassar, remain rather exceptional. There are still very few
redevelopment schemes dialoging with the surrounding fabric—as in the case of the
Cultural Park for Children by Abdelhalim LAbdelhalim (1992)—or seeking to integrate
the preexisting architecture (e.g., the cultural ensemble formed by the new Opera
designed by Nikken Sekkei Planners [1987] and reused former fair pavilions). With
globalization entering the scene, approaches to architecture greatly diversified during the
1990s, ranging from the interpretation of tradition pursued by Abdelhalim Ibrahim
Abdelhalim, to the deconstructionist collision of old and new praised by Ahmed Mito,
author of the neo-Pharaonic new Supreme Court building (2000), whereas countless
exclusive compounds, drawing on the American model of the service city and displaying
“Spanish-style” villas with swimming pool and garden, are being built on the desertic
outskirts of the congested metropolis at tremendous rate. Cairo is definitely entering the
21st century with a fast-changing morphology.

MERCEDES VOLAIT
Aga Khan Award (1977-); Art Deco; Art Nouveau (Jugendstil);

Egyptian Revival; Fathy, Hassan (Egypt); Gabr, A.Labib (Egypt)

Further Reading

“Abd al-Jawad, Tawfiq Ahmad, (Egyptian Architecture in the 20th Century), Cairo:
Maktabat al-Anjilu al-Misriyah, 1989
Abdelhalim, Abdelhalim Ibrahim, “Egypt: Country Focus,” 75 (April 1999)
Curtis, Eleanor, “Culture Clash: The Development of New Cairo,” 67:1 1/12 (1997)
Myntti, Cynthia, Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press, 1999
Volait, Mercedes, Cairo: Centre d’Etudes et de Documentation Economiques,
Juridiques et Sociales, 1988
Volait, Mercedes, “The Age of Transition: The Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” in
edited by André Raymond, Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press, 2002
Volait, Mercedes, “Making Cairo Modern (1870-1950): Multiple Models for a
‘European-style’ Urbanism,” in edited by Joe Nasr and Mercedes Volait, pp. 17—
50, Chichester, U.K.: Wiley-Academy, 2003

CALATRAVA, SANTIAGO 1951-—

Architect, Spain

Santiago Calatrava studied art and architecture in Valencia and pursued a degree in
civil engineering at Zurich’s Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule (ETH, or Federal
Institute of Technology). After graduation, he worked at the ETH’s Institute for Building
Statics and Construction and Institute for Plane Statics and Light Construction. In
professional practice for just 20 years, he currently has offices in Paris, Zurich, and
Valencia, where he works on a number of large-scale architectural projects, on
establishing his work as a standard by which later engineering design will be measured,
and on winning countless awards including the 1992 Gold Medal of the Institute of
Structural Engineers and the 1987 Auguste Perret UIA Prize.

Although Calatrava’s work might be best characterized by the futuristic forms of his
famous bridge designs, his oeuvre spreads far beyond the engineering wonders he has
built. The architect has written that his motto is “Nature is both mother and teacher,” and
this philosophy is reflected clearly in the manipulation of seemingly unnatural materials
like concrete that has dominated some of his stronger work. Nearly all of Calatrava’s
projects tackle complicated technical issues and are resolved in surprisingly elegant ways.
Often inspired by nature, the organic forms that are his solutions leap to new technical
heights in a synthesis of light, material, and form.

His most recognizable bridge design might be the Alamillo Bridge (1987-92) in
Seville, Spain, spanning 820 feet (250 meters) over the Guadalquivir River. Originally
proposed as a twin bridge with a connecting viaduct, the design would cross the river in
two locations, approximately | mile (1.5 kilometers) apart. The twin bridges were
designed so that their tall, inclined masts would reach toward each other, forming an
implied triangle that had its apex far above the site. This scheme was ultimately
abandoned and adjusted to a single bridge and viaduct, but the inclined mast was
retained. The extraordinary weight of the mast (steel filled with concrete) angling back at
58 degrees was enough to support the roadbed without the need for counter-stay cables.
This was a first in bridge design, and is a stunning sight. The 1640-foot (500 meter)
viaduct served as an entrance gateway for Expo ’92 in Seville, for which Calatrava also
designed the Kuwait Pavilion. Typical of Calatrava’s other works, this bridge was
designed to seamlessly accommodate pedestrian traffic and connect with motor roads.
The Stadelhofen Station in Zurich presented Calatrava with a unique
chance to make a mark on a city. The site the station was to occupy was
challenging in that it varied greatly in elevation from end to end and was
curved along its length. Other proposals for the station involved roofing
over the area and hiding the bulk of the building underground. However,
Calatrava saw this as an opportunity to show off the imperfections of the
site. The station he designed is left open to reveal the entire workings of
the structure to the viewer. Conceived as a collection of bridges, the

project took full advantage of the dynamic qualities of the site.

@

Campo Volantin Footbridge (1990-
98), Bilbao, Spain

© Johnson Architectural
Images/GreatBuildings.com

Since the early years of the 21st century, Calatrava’s work has become visible in the
United States after years of almost exclusively European building. In 2002 his first
American bridge was realized at the Turtle Bay Exploration Center in Redding,
California, linking different sides of the park with the Sacramento River Trail System.
The glass span and decking evoke weightlessness and contribute to a seamless integration
into the site. The bridge’s north-leaning mast doubles as a sundial.

The architect’s largest United States commission to date will be the Oakland Cathedral
(Oakland, California). Begun in November of 2000, Calatrava’s design (not yet
completed) will have movable glass-and-steel sections evocative of a pair of praying
hands with the capability of opening skyward. Calatrava’s other notable American
commission—and the first to be completed in the States—was the Milwaukee Art
Museum expansion (May 2001). The ingenious riverfront concrete and steel structure is
topped with glass “fins” that open and close depending on exterior light; the architect has
likened its movement to a bird in flight. A pedestrian bridge links the city to the museum
and the landscaped shore of Lake Michigan. In the Milwaukee Museum building,
Calatrava’s affinity for Finnish-born Eero Saarinen’s work (namely the curvilinear TWA
[Trans World Airline] terminal at John F.Kennedy Airport) as an Expressionist modernist
aesthetic is clear.

EUGENIA BELL

Selected Works

Schwarzhaupt Factory, Dielsdorf, Switzerland, 1982
Jakem Warehouse, Miinchwilen, Switzerland, 1985
DOBI Office Building, Suhr, Switzerland, 1986
Wohlen High School, Wohlen, Switzerland, 1988
Lucerne Station Hall, Lucerne, Switzerland, 1989
Stadelhofen Station, Zurich, Switzerland, 1990
Alamillo Bridge, Seville, Spain, 1992
Montjuic Communications Tower, Barcelona, Spain, 1992
Kuwait Pavilion, for Expo 1992, Seville, Spain, 1992
Lyon Airport Station, Lyon, France, 1994
Buchen Housing Estate, Wtirenlingen, Switzerland, 1996
Alcoy Municipal Center, Alcoy, Spain, 1996
Orient Station, Lisbon World Exposition, Portugal, 1998
Campo Volantin Bridge, Bilbao, Spain, 1998
Sondika Airport, Bilbao, Spain, 1999
Oakland Cathedral, California, unfinished

Milwaukee Art Museum, Minnesota, 2001

Fe

Quadracci Pavilion, Milwaukee Art
Museum, South Terrace, view with
wings open (2001)

Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan

Further Reading

Frampton, Kenneth, Anthony C.Webster, and Anthony Tischhauser, Basel: Birkhauser,
1996
Tischhauser, Anthony, and Stanislaus von Moos, Basel: Birkhauser, 1998

CAMPUS PLANNING

As the traditional college evolved into the modern university at the dawn of the 20th
century, campus planning reached a new complexity. For more than 200 years, college
campuses reflected the colonial models of Harvard College (1636), the College of
William and Mary (1693), and Yale College (1717), the latter of which began as a few
buildings with grass lawns. The evolution from simplicity to complexity saw varied
interpretations of Gothic, medieval, and Georgian institutional architecture as the
symbolism of higher learning grew more grandiose, corresponding with the growth and
purpose of education in the nation.

A new awareness of the importance of scientific scholarship and rationalism changed
the function and scope of education. Disregarding tradition, colleges became more
specialized, emulating English and German models of the university that combined
colleges. Johns Hopkins University (1867), for example, located its first campus in plain
buildings on Baltimore’s city streets, distinguishing itself from its predecessors by
purposely ignoring the familiar picturesque settings that had guarded college learning.
Like the political laboratories of German education, the university expressed a new
scholarly purpose, one that was utilitarian and serious.

As complex universities replaced traditional colleges, they grew larger, replacing the
memory of the village with the image of the city. Not incidentally, a new type of campus
planning emerged that took its fundamental reference from urbanism. By 1900, campus
planning fell under the thrall of the Beaux-Arts, which also had a great influence on
urban planning as a result of the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago.
With its ordered City Beautiful buildings and boulevards, the exposition emphasized
stately systems of organization that implied not only virtue but order, characteristics
eminently suited to the image of the university.

Educational institutions, faced with the need to integrate an increasingly complex
array of facilities within a unified design, were easily drawn to the principles of the City
Beautiful and its Beaux-Arts high-mindedness. After 1900, numerous articles appeared
bemoaning the “un-unified character” of the campus. The main task facing the campus
planner, noted A.A.D.F.Hamlin, the educator and architect, was to create a “unity of
effect.” Critical to this endeavor was the idea of the master plan. Campuses, like cities,
took up the idea of planning in a swell of Progressive Era enthusiasm.

The influence of the Columbian Exposition was immediately evident in Henry Ives
Cobb’s 1893 plan for the University of Chicago. Stylistically linked to English Collegiate
Gothic models, Cobb’s plan lacked much of the elaborate Beaux-Arts detail evident in
Charles McKim’s 1894 (revised) plan for Columbia University, which was the first


campus plan to really show the practicality of Beaux-Arts symmetry to meet the needs of
the new multi-structure university. The designation “university” was part of the new plan,
changed from Columbia College when Columbia moved from its small midtown location
to its new site on upper Broadway, the former site of the Bloomingdale Asylum. McKim,
who had studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and had designed a building for the Chicago
exposition, produced a plan for Columbia that was eminently urban—absent dormitories,
with buildings that abutted the street and an entrance on Broadway—while expressing an
extremely formal presence that included a domed colonnaded main building
hierarchically raised above the symmetrical campus. The Broadway entrance evoked a
stately formalism, in tune with its Beaux-Arts influence, leading to a campus quadrangle,
McKim’s version of the Beaux-Arts (main courtyard).

Beaux-Arts campus planning soon became the rage. McKim, with his partners Mead
and White, were hired to develop a new campus plan at Thomas Jefferson’s University of
Virginia, whereas Parker, Thomas and Rice designed a new Beaux-Arts campus for Johns
Hopkins in 1904. Cass Gilbert produced an elaborate Beaux-Arts plan for the University
of Minnesota in 1908. Olmsted’s parklike plan for the University of California at
Berkeley campus was put on the shelf, and a competition was held that awarded the
commission for a new campus to a Frenchman, Emiule Bénard (almost all the entrants
were Beaux-Arts trained), who created a grand and ornate campus plan. However, when
Bénard, in a pique, refused to move to California to supervise its realization, John Galen
Howard (who placed fourth in the competition) replaced him, substantially modifying
Bénard’s plan, softening it, and integrating other elements from the traditional American
campus planning.

Beaux-Arts architecture fulfilled another need for the new university: it expressed a
grand monumentality of permanence and importance that appealed to a new wealthy class
of philanthropic benefactors who emerged in the early 20th century. Cloaking themselves
in art and culture, these philanthropists set their sights on creating personal memorials.
The philanthropic benefactor desired a worthy monument. With large sums of money
being contributed to educational institutions, it became necessary to provide tangible
evidence of the gifts beyond the expansion of research programs and academic pursuits.
Gone was the notion of utilitarian educational structure, as evidenced in the new Parker,
Thomas and Rice Beaux-Arts campus for Johns Hopkins in 1904. The campus of
architectural grandeur had arrived.

John D.Rockefeller’s endowment to the University of Chicago was bestowed without
direct involvement in campus planning. However, Leland Stanford had no such hesitancy
when he endowed Stanford University at the end of the 19th century, transforming
Frederick Law Olmsted’s plan for informal structures set carefully in the coastal foothills
behind Palo Alto into a formal arrangement of buildings around a fully enclosed
quadrangle. Anticipating Beaux-Arts formalism, the university was built on a flat site laid
out with a formal axis. Stanford’s ordered monumentality made a good fit with his desire
for a proper personal monument. At the same time, it suited the emerging needs of the
new expanding university.

So influential was the Beaux-Arts campus that it essentially defined campus planning
in the first half of the 20th century. Even campuses that were developed in the 18th or
19th century rushed to modify their campus plans in the Beaux-Arts fashion in the early
1900s. The modifications to Olmsted’s plans at the University of California at Berkeley

and Stanford were emblematic of the changing tide. As Olmsted’s firm was taken over by
his two sons, it could not ignore the trend, and so it specialized in campus planning in the
Beaux-Arts style, developing a plan for Harvard that emphasized strict symmetry and
axiality.

Princeton University sometimes seemed to be at the whim of these changes, going
from a symmetrical campus in the early 19th century to a more informal campus plan at
the end of the century to a revised plan at the beginning of the 20th century by Ralph
Adams Cram that emphasized a new axial order, even though Cram’s plans,. Gothic in
style, also included many smaller spaces that ignored Beaux-Arts conventions. At the
University of Wisconsin at Madison, the Ecole-trained Paul Philippe Cret transformed the
existing campus in 1908 with a new central axis, cross axes, and domed buildings laid out
in a Beaux-Arts pattern. In 1910, Cass Gilbert redesigned the University of Texas at
Austin with a new integrated pattern of formal quadrangles and a centralized tower
monument.

With the expansion of higher education in the 20th century and the increasing
presence of the large university, another trend developed that sought to reestablish the
intimacy of the college campus. Although running not quite counter to Beaux-Arts
principles, often embodying many of its formal characteristics, it nonetheless sought to
bring about a more collegiate presence by looking back to the form of the English
medieval college.

The principal physical expression of this nostalgia was the enclosed quadrangle, which
evoked a kind of cloistered and secluded education that most 20th-century campus
planning had moved beyond. If its principal metaphor was the monastery, it was
nonetheless a very collegial monastery where intellectual life was hoped to thrive within
a closed setting of fellowship.

The most popular advocate of this collegiate traditionalism was Cram, a political
conservative who was opposed to the “Germanic secularism” of contemporary campus
planning and sought to rectify it with romantic evocations of medieval architecture that
relied on Gothic structures and closed quadrangles. Cram’s Gothic campuses sprang up at
West Point, Sweet Briar College, and Richmond College in Virginia as well as at
Princeton.

As neo-Gothic enthusiasm spread, often in the form of a compromise between
medievalism and classicism, new proponents took up the style. Around 1914, Charles
Zeller Klauder designed Cram-influenced structures at Wellesley, Cornell, and Princeton.
In 1925, he developed a campus plan for Concordia Seminary in St. Louis that relied on
Cram’s formula of a cathedral tower and monastic buildings set around quadrangles. In
Pittsburgh, Klauder was responsible for the towering 42-story Gothic Cathedral of
Learning at the University of Pittsburgh, which dramatically expressed the underlying
religious preoccupation of the neo-Gothicists. Built in 1926, the building seemed almost a
moral corrective to the symbolic significance of the skyscraper. The university, Klauder
seemed to be saying with his heaven-reaching edifice, relied on God, not Mammon.

Prior to World War II, campus planning stodgily resisted inroads by modern
architecture. Although a few anomalies to the traditional campus were to be found, for
the most part higher education regarded modern architecture with a frozen look of
displeasure. By the 1940s, International Style structures began to reface American cities


but exerted little influence on college campuses. Mies van der Rohe’s 1938 plan for the
Illinois Institute of Technology was a noted exception.

Also in 1938, Frank Lloyd Wright tried his hand at campus planning at Florida
Southern College. The result was a geometrically fascinating arrangement of irregularly
shaped buildings. However, like Wright’s highly schematic urban plan, Broadacre City, it
remained mostly a curiosity. Other notable experiments of the prewar era were Paul
Rudolph’s master plan for the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama and Walter Gropius and
Marcel Breuer’s plan for Black Mountain College. In New York City, Hunter College
came forth with a brazen new International Style structure in 1942 but had few followers,
even though the trend seemed serious in architectural magazines that debated the wisdom
of “going modern” on the campus.

After World War IL society was recast socially, economically, and demographically.
Huge increases in college enrollments forced the need for new campus planning. At the
same time, however, college designers began to abandon the idea of the master plan in
favor of growth contingencies that emphasized flexibility and adaptability.

The result was an abandonment of the fully integrated campus, as new, large
unconventional structures began to be built to meet enrollment increases and fill in spaces
on traditional campuses. Freed from the restraints of compatibility, university
administrators concentrated on building programs that featured large, often out-of-scale
improvements to dormitories, student unions, and laboratories.

An early example of the new attitude toward campus planning was Alvar Aalto’s
sprawling modern dormitory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1949,
followed four years later by Eero Saarinen’s three-pointed auditorium. At Yale
University, a hodgepodge of new structures took defiant residence on the campus,
including Louis Kahn’s Art Gallery, Gordon Bunshaft’s Rare Book Library, Paul
Rudolph’s Art and Architecture Building, and Philip Johnson’s Science Center. When
campus additions were conceived of as a group, as they were at the Harvard Graduate
Center in 1949, they were often sited irregularly in unpredictable arrangements that
defied the traditional norm of the college quadrangle.

The new campus planning was an aggressive repudiation of Beaux-Arts planning, with
each new building conceived of as an individual unit, as dramatic and unpredictable as
the times. When campus planners reached into the past, it was often no further than Paris
in 1932, where Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret established a vocabulary of forms at
the Swiss Student Hostel that relied on masonry framing, minimal detailing, and the
calibrated curtain wall.

When considerations were given to planning an entire campus, the presiding rationale
was often based on organizing by function and accessibility. The new plan for the
University of Illinois at Chicago Circle in 1965, for example, focused on developing
specialized areas, instead of having separate buildings for each department, with
circulation being the foremost priority.

The social upheavals of the 1960s challenged the traditions of formal education and
brought about significant changes to education if not always campus planning. The
University of California at Santa Cruz took a large step away from the traditional college
campus with its 1963 master plan by John Carl Warnecke and Associates, which totally
dispensed with the idea of formal symmetry and took the site’s natural topography in the
California coastal foothills as a basis for locating the campus’ “cluster colleges.”


The most innovative of the clusters was Moore and Turnbull’s Kresge College,
University of California, Santa Cruz, created like a rural compact village in sight of the
ocean. At the same time the plan reached into the future, it evoked campus planning
ideals from the past. Intact was the romantic notion of education isolated in nature.
Recalling Jefferson’s ideal of dialogue and proximity between students and faculty at the
University of Virginia, the plan encouraged faculty to live on the campus in informal
settings near where they teach. It also recalled Olmsted’s original plan for the Berkeley
campus by minimizing the proportion of land to buildings and keeping them informal—a
university regulation prohibits any building taller than two-thirds the height of the coastal
redwood trees that populate the area.

Another radical departure in campus planning came about after William Pereira’s
1960 plan for the University of California at Irvine, planned around a series of concentric
rings. Although Pereira’s plan appeared to lack any overall design concept, it became a
proving ground for the postmodern campus, especially after 1985, when Frank Gehry’s
three-pavilion structure for classrooms, engineering laboratories, and administrative
facilities provided a new shock to the system for campus planning.

Along with structures by Robert Venturi, Eric Moss, and Charles Moore, Gehry’s
colorful collage of ramps, stairways, porches, and canopies created a furor at the time; it
also might have served as an annunciation in campus planning, sweeping in an even freer,
more unpredictable collection of ideas of what the campus should be.

RICK ADAMS
Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Broadacre City (1934-35), Wright; Bunshaft,
Gordon (United States); City Beautiful Movement; Corbusier, Le
(Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Cram, Ralph Adams (United
States); Gehry, Frank (United States); Gilbert, Cass (United States); Kahn,
Louis (United States); McKim, Mead and White (United States); Mies van
der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Saarinen, Eero (Finland)

Further Reading

Dober, Richard P., New York: Wiley, 1992
Dober, Richard P., New York: McGraw Hill, 1996
Gaines, Thomas A., New York: Praeger, 1991
Turner, Paul Venable, New York: Architectural History Foundation, and Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1984

CANADA

Canada’s architecture has been intricately bound up with the nation’s search for an
identity distinct from European and American influences. At the dawn of the 20th

century, the lingering effects of England’s authority over Canadian political and
economic affairs were still keenly felt, and Canadian architecture was held firmly in the
thrall of Victorian trends. Although the major external influences on Canada’s
architecture originally came from France and Great Britain, movements popular in the
United States began to attract notice as Canada directed more interest toward the nation
with whom it shared a common geography and a history of recent settlement.
Nonetheless, the new century also represented a coming of age for Canada’s architects, as
professional associations of architecture and engineering were established to ensure
clients of minimum standards of practice and to enable Canadian architects to offer
serious competition to British and American architects, who had been awarded many
substantial contracts during the preceding years.

A significant factor affecting Canada’s architectural evolution was the
political autonomy that came with the costly sacrifices in World War I.
This served as a national coming of age, and Canadians realized that they
were now entitled to make their own decisions with regard to their
country. The struggles during the Great Depression of the 1930s and the
contributions to the World War II effort were followed by a high-spirited
postwar era of booming population and extensive development. Canada’s
economy relies heavily on abundant natural resources, but technological
innovation and development have diversified the country’s research and
manufacturing sectors. The perceived architectural colonialism of the
early decades has evolved into an architectural vocabulary that reflects a
maturing sense of independence and emerging national identity. There
were several factors propelling this architectural evolution.

Immigration and Early External Influences

Canada had benefited greatly as a consequence of the global economic depression
between 1873 and 1896. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, publicity schemes
and land grants attracted thousands of impoverished immigrants from the British Isles
and Europe, in addition to young families who migrated from the eastern provinces to
settle the western plains. In their new and harsh environment, the settlers experienced
limited success at reproducing familiar architecture, and inevitably the use of locally
available construction materials merged with cultural heritage, creating a distinctive
Canadian “folk” architecture. Such original, vernacular design was particularly noticeable
in regions settled by immigrants from Eastern Europe, the Ukraine, Russia, Scandinavia,
Iceland, and China. The strict religious beliefs of some prairie settlers, such as the
Doukhobors and the Hutterite Brethren, predetermined the form of their community-
focused architecture.

With the massive immigration to the newly created prairie provinces of Manitoba,
Saskatchewan, and Alberta, as well as British Columbia, governments embarked on an
ambitious program to supply new settlements with essential services—legislative
buildings, post offices, immigration and customs houses, policing, courthouses, and

correctional facilities. The federal government architecture of the early 20th century
closely adhered to precedents set by Thomas Fuller, chief architect of the Department of
Public Works from 1881 until 1896. His carefully situated and finely detailed buildings
with their rusticated masonry and textured surfaces contributed significantly to the High
Victorian character still evident in many Canadian communities. However, Victorian
eclecticism was gradually over-taken by more contemporary approaches to design, such
as the Edwardian baroque, the Richardsonian Romanesque, the Chateau style derived
from the Loire Valley of France, and the neo-classical Beaux-Arts tradition promoted at
the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago. The classical principles of rational
clarity and ordered planning that were the hallmarks of the teachings of the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts influenced Canadian architectural education of this era. Whether the
practitioners acquired their skills in Paris or from American architecture schools, many of
Canada’s early 20th-century architects converted to this multinational design philosophy.
As particular styles became associated with certain building types,
Canadian architecture assumed a more consistent and less decorative
character. Beaux-Arts classicism was expressed in the monumental
legislatures designed and built in the prairie provinces between 1888 and
World War I. These were highlighted by statuesque central domes and
entrance porticoes with rhythmic arrays of double-height columns,
strikingly similar to the Minnesota and Rhode Island state capitols. The
sole exception was the Richardsonian Romanesque design of the Ontario
Legislative Building (1892, Richard A.Waite) at Toronto’s Queen’s Park.
Neoclassical vocabulary was further adapted to situations such as
E.J.Lennox’s Toronto Power Generating Station (1903-13) at Niagara
Falls, where his client wished to create a majestic temple to new
technology. This building is visually grounded by a large central block and
pedimented entrance portico. The extremities of the side wings are
anchored by smaller cubic blocks, and the entire facade is unified by the
entablature and an imposing arrangement of Ionic columns—a grandiose
shell for a utilitarian function.

Climate and the Natural Environment: Technological Innovation

As the first immigrants had discovered, the Canadian climate and physical geography
ensured that, over a period of time, it proved expedient to adapt foreign styles and
building technologies. Early in the 20th century, the National Research Council, a
multidisciplinary institute of the federal government, saw the necessity for developing
building materials and techniques to assist Canadians in their perpetual battle against the
elements. The Institute for Research in Construction was established to develop
materials, insulation, and construction standards suita-ble to every part of the country.
This research led to specialized construction appropriate to Arctic conditions, such as
cold temperatures, permafrost, low snow cover, and high winds. During the 1970s

escalating energy costs fostered interest in solar design and collector panels, heat pumps,
superinsulated windows, and low-emission glazing, culminating in the development of
the R-2000 building system.

In addition, prefabrication and standardized housing designs have often been used to
offset construction costs. During the World War II era, available housing was at a
premium, forcing the federal government to establish Wartime Housing Limited to design
and build thousands of small family homes. Many Canadian cities still retain
neighborhoods of these “wartime” houses, originally considered to be an expedient yet
temporary measure to alleviate the housing shortage. The lessons learned from such
projects were adapted to other circumstances, where the lumbering, mining, pulp and
paper milling, and hydroelectric power generation industries established company towns
in remote parts of the country. On a site selected for an aluminum smelter because of its
deep-water access to the Pacific, the hydroelectric power capacity of the Nechako River,
and the broad alluvial plain on which a town could be built, the planned community of
Kitimat, British Columbia, was created by Alcan Aluminum during the early 1950s.
Referencing Ebenezer Howard’s garden city concept, the model town included a
greenbelt that encircled distinct residential and commercial districts.

Many of Canada’s rapidly constructed northern and aboriginal
communities are also distinguished by standardized and prefabricated
buildings. Although the earliest of these quickly proved unsuited to the
climatic extremes of the northern territories, recent buildings were more
appropriately designed. They are now raised off the ground, with an
insulating barrier under the main floor to prevent the building’s heat from
melting the permafrost; walls and roofs are totally insulated with no
vented roof crawl spaces; and the windows are few and small in area.
Even though these engineered structures are not necessarily architectural
masterpieces, they are very characteristic of Canada’s north. With
continued improvements to materials and technology, northern
communities now have many examples ofa creatively designed yet
pragmatic architecture. The Nunavut Legislative Assembly (1999),
designed for the new northern territory by The Arcop Group and Full
Circle Architecture, combines the latest in energy-conservation technology
with a series of interior spaces and symbolic forms important to Inuit
culture.

Geography and Transportation: Regionalism

For centuries, aboriginal communities existed along trade routes or wherever agriculture
was viable, and with a growing European interest in Canada’s natural resources,
particularly furs and lumber, permanent settlements sprang up near trading posts and
transshipment centers. In the late 19th century, completion of the first Canadian
transcontinental railway (1886) expedited the shipment of goods and people and fostered

the establishment of towns along its route. The western railway towns of wooden false-
fronted buildings overlooking a broad Main Street greeted thousands of immigrants as
they disembarked to begin their homesteading life. By contrast, government buildings,
prosperous businesses, and financial institutions were usually constructed of brick or
assembled from prefabricated components that had been shipped from the east. The
thriving agricultural economy of the 20th century added another prominent feature to
prairie towns: the grain storage elevator, or “prairie sentinel.” These mammoth wooden
structures, with steeply pitched roofs and the town’s name boldly emblazoned on their
sides, could be identified from a great distance. Industrial versions of these elevators can
be found at the major Great Lakes and ocean ports, where a phalanx of massive concrete
silos stretches along the waterfront, with the railway spur line on one side and the
freighters tied up on the other. It was a complex such as this that attracted Le Corbusier’s
admiration for their honest industrial form.

The high costs of transporting goods, materials, and labor over immense
distances and the climatic extremes in this, the world’s second-largest
country, continue to foster regionalism in Canadian architecture.
Professional architects have incorporated local characteristics in their
projects, as seen in Peter Rose’s post-modern Bradley House (1979) in
North Hatley, Québec. This country home evokes the spirit of a 1 6th-
century Palladian villa, adopts Queen Anne Revival features prevalent in
the community, and incorporates local building materials. One of the most
outstanding examples of postmodern Canadian regionalism is the
Mississauga City Hall and Civic Square (1986), designed by Edward

Jones and Michael Kirkland to reflect both the maturity of this sprawling
Toronto suburb and its roots as a rural farming community. A lofty clock
tower presides over an intricate collage of massive agricultural forms,
fronted by an open agora that is enclosed by modest colonnades. The
dramatic interior spaces continue these historical references, and the
intricate detailing and high-tech finishes imbue the building with a modern
persona.

International Architecture and Canadian Identity

When Canada acquired dominion status with the 1867 confederation of four British
provinces, Canadian sensibilities turned toward the picturesque neo-Gothic and its High
Victorian interpretation. Used for religious buildings, educational institutions, and most
outstanding, the Parliament Buildings in Ottawa (1865, Frederick Warburton Stent and
Augustus Laver; 1866, Thomas Fuller and H.Chilion Jones), the neo-Gothic style defined
Canada’s affiliation with the British Empire. It was subsequently reproduced in the
Centre Block (1927, John A.Pearson and J.Omar Marchand), which was redesigned and
rebuilt following a disastrous fire in 1916. Even though the heavy masonry and mansard
roofs of the Second Empire style had been popular for a brief period at the turn of the

century, particularly in Québec, where it expressed the province’s historic ties with
France, Victorian neo-Gothicism remained the prevalent form of architectural expression
in English-speaking Canada well into the 20th century. This style was evident not only in
large public buildings but also in vernacular architecture, as manifested in the numerous
white, clapboarded community churches and gable-fronted farmhouses of Ontario.
Because it symbolized a valued affiliation with all things British, Victorian Gothic
remained in vogue in the Canadian architectural landscape long after it fell from favor
elsewhere.

Nonetheless, Canadians were becoming ever more preoccupied with defining their
own distinctive and recognizable architectural style. The most successful of these efforts
was achieved by a series of luxurious railway hotels, initiated at Québec City with the
Canadian Pacific Railway’s Chateau Frontenac (1892-93, Bruce Price). The last and
undoubtedly most impressive of these, the Banff Springs Hotel, was constructed in two
phases to enlarge the original wood-frame resort. Designed by the railway’s own
personnel, Walter S.Painter in 1911-14 and John Wilson Orrock in 1925-28, this
building was characterized by steeply pitched roofs, multiple dormer windows, corner
turrets, and solid massing. This unabashedly picturesque style has been termed either
Northern French Gothic or Canadian Chateau. In acknowledging the effect of this
Canadian architectural idiom, the federal government approved an urban plan for the
national capital, Ottawa, which made particular reference to the appropriateness of the
Chateau style. Consequently, several mansard-roofed government buildings were
constructed in the vicinity of Parliament Hill during the Depression era. Even after World
War II the federal government commissioned H.L.Allward and G.R.Gouinlock of
Toronto to design the East (1949-56) and West (1954-58) Memorial buildings in this
idiom. These interconnecting buildings successfully combined the Chateau style with the
restrained and subtle detailing of the “stripped” classicism that had emerged during the
1930s.

Whereas the federal government was attempting to define a national style, John
M.Lyle, a Toronto architect and teacher, encouraged his colleagues to study European
modermism. Canadian architects and their clients were generally reluctant to
wholeheartedly embrace new trends, and even John Lyle’s own approach sought to
combine traditional forms with a new language of ornament reflecting Canadian history
and regional diversity. An example of his approach to modern classicism was the Bank of
Nova Scotia (1930) in Calgary, which contained neoclassical elements compressed into
the building’s facade and highlighted by decorative imagery of western Canada, such as
Mounties, aboriginal figures, horses, bison, wheat sheaves, and oil wells. Lyle’s ideas
were taken a step further by Ernest Cormier, who successfully combined attributes of the
neoclassical, Art Deco, and moderne to create dramatic architectural statements. For his
1920s design of the Université de Montreal (1943), situated on the slopes of Mont Royal,
Cormier arranged a brick and reinforced-concrete structural system in a symmetrical
Beaux-Arts organizational plan, complemented by the precise, vertical piers that
articulate the main elevation and delineate the tall, domed central tower.

It was not until after World War II, however, that most Canadian architects discarded
historicism. With technological development instigated by wartime research and the
booming population, architects largely ignored the International Style in its pure form
and turned to the Modern movement. This trend first made inroads in Vancouver,


nurtured by a vibrant community of young artists and designers led by Charles B.K.Van
Norman, B.C.Binning, Frederic Lasserre, Robert A.D.Berwick, and Charles Edward
Pratt, who were followed by Ron Thom and Arthur Erickson. The first Massey Gold
Medal, jointly established by the Right Honorable Vincent Massey, governor-general of
Canada, and the Royal Architectural Institute of Canada (RAIC), was awarded in 1952 to
Semmens and Simpson for Vancouver’s Marwell Place, one of Canada’s earliest
renditions of international modernism.

The 1950s and 1960s heralded an era of profound change and development that saw
the destruction of many buildings, structures, and societal institutions. Glass-enclosed
skyscrapers began to dominate the major Canadian cities, and Toronto in particular saw
the emergence of the large, multidisciplined corporate design firm. One of most prolific
of these was John B. Parkin Associates, renowned for its collection of rectilinear
buildings designed in the international modern style. The characteristic traits of this
design firm—formality, precision, and technology—are evident in the Ortho
Pharmaceutical (1956) office’s bold, white concrete frame; the dark recessed glazing with
steel spandrel panels; and the adjacent manufacturing plant of white glazed brick and
contrasting dark ribbon windows. The John B.Parkin firm, with Bregmann and Hamann,
also worked with Mies van der Rohe on the Toronto-Dominion Centre (phase 1, 1969), a
high-rise development in Toronto’s financial district. The resulting pair of finely detailed
black towers, with exposed I beams traveling the full height of the immense curtain walls,
immediately became a city landmark.

Montréal experienced an exuberant proliferation of new architecture with its hosting
of the world’s fair, Expo 1967, during the centennial year of Canada’s confederation.
This celebration was an opportunity for the nation to showcase its achievements to the
world, and the Expo pavilions were an eclectic sampling of architectural modernism.
Two of the Government of Canada theme pavilions (1967) occupied a massive assembly
of interconnected tetrahedrons constructed of exposed-steel space frames that were
designed by the Montréal firm of Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopulos, Lebensold, and Sise.
Another remarkable Expo 1967 project was the experimental housing complex of
prefabricated concrete block units, Habitat (1967). The original but unsuccessful
intention of the young architect, Moshe Safdie, was to create a prototype for low-cost
housing.

Although large urban centers benefited from these major design projects, smaller-scale
regional architecture continued to flourish. Still a source of creative inspiration, the
prairie provinces produced unique Expressionist projects by young architects. Their
designs employed natural materials, sinuous lines, and organic forms to mold structures
that successfully achieved the contradictory objectives of blending with the landscape
and drawing the attention of the viewer. Partially set into a hillside, Clifford Wiens’ St.
Mark’s Shop (1960) was an artisan’s studio with a conical concrete roof, reminiscent of
the tepees of the plains aboriginal cultures. In Manitoba, Etienne Gaboury’s church for
the Paroisse du Précieux Sang (1967) reflected recent changes to the Roman Catholic
liturgy with a circular interior space, capped by a conical wooden roof that spiraled up to
a strategically placed window at the apex. A third innovator was Douglas Cardinal,
whose first major commission was St. Mary’s Church (1968), constructed in Red Deer,
Alberta. This structure of sinuously curving walls of red brick enclosing a semicircular
nave displays what has become the architect’s signature style. Above this looms a


prestressed-concrete roof whose form resembles the experimental tensile fabric structures
of the era.

The 1970s and 1980s saw the emergence of several architects, such as A.J.Diamond
and Barton Myers, Raymond Moriyama (Moriyama and Teshima Architects), and
Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects, who addressed the requirements of
urban living. Given the sobriquet of late modernism, their design approach was typified
by projects such as Edmonton’s Citadel Theatre (1976) by Diamond and Myers, with
Richard L.Wilkin. Occupying a busy corner site in the city center, the glass walls,
awnings, and skylights of the reception area initiate a visual conversation between the
people on the street and the theater’s activities inside.

A growing concern over the destruction of the country’s historic architectural fabric
evolved into the heritage conservation movement. In addition to numerous local heritage
initiatives, this received federal government support through the conservation programs
of Parks Canada. Heritage conservation created a need for architects who were skilled at
combining new technologies and public sensibilities with an appreciation for older
structures and traditional building methods. One of the earliest projects was the
midcentury reconstruction of the Fortress of Louisbourg, originally built by France on fle
Royale during the early 18th century and subsequently destroyed by the British. The 1995
declaration of the British colonial port of Lunenburg, Nova Scotia (established 1753), as
a World Heritage Site underlines the importance of Canada’s architectural heritage.

Although modernism continued to dominate Canadian architecture during the last
decades of the 20th century, a new technical style has evolved that merges urban
modernism, industrially based design strategies, and the exuberant individuality of small
innovative firms. This new style has been masterfully executed by several architects with
roots, once again, in the western provinces. The design team of Patricia and John Patkau
has been internationally recognized for their expressive geometric building forms that
successfully reflect the inherent characteristics of the natural surroundings. The small
scale of many of their projects has not precluded them from making bold and
unapologetic architectural statements. In a similar vein IKOY Architects (formerly the
IKOY Partnership), with principal architect Ron Keenberg, has become known for their
High-Tech style, as evinced by the Conservation Laboratories (1996) for the National
Archives of Canada in Gatineau, Québec. Glazed walls completely enclose the large,
climate controlled archival storage vaults on top of which many conservation lab
functions occur. The shallow arched roof is supported on intricately assembled columns,
reminiscent of high-tension power transmission towers. As a major cultural institution,
the National Archives has continued to reflect Canadian cultural identity via architectural
expression.

Throughout the 20th century, Canadian architectural expression generally lagged a
decade or so behind international tastes. Even when influenced by international trends,
Canadian architecture has evinced a restrained and carefully considered personality, often
because geography and climate have enforced a pragmatic respect for the economics of
design and construction. In contrast the dramatic and varied natural Canadian landscape
has inspired architects and encouraged a philosophy of limited interference with the
environment.

For several decades Canada’s major urban centers produced renowned architects of
the Modern movement whose works speak the language common to the rest of the world.


The search for a recognizable Canadian identity has colored efforts by regional architects
to create a distinctive style rather than following the internationally approved but
anonymous design trends. Unfortunately, their work has frequently gone unnoticed by the
international architectural community, which fails to appreciate the environmental and
cultural constraints under which Canadian architects work. As new technologies shrink
the perceived disparities and distances between countries and settlement increases in the
northern regions of the world, the 21st century may see a new appreciation for Canadian
architecture and building technology.

RHODA BELLAMY

Further Reading

The growing recognition of the contribution of aboriginal cultures to Canadian society,
combined with the effect of immigrants arriving from all corners of the globe, heralds an
era of boundless architectural creativity in the 21st century. The following works enable
the reader to explore Canadian architecture and acquire an understanding of its rich and
diverse history. Alan Gowans’s classic book, although somewhat dated, offers a
perspective from the midcentury period. The most recent comprehensive survey of
Canadian architecture is Harold Kalman’s update to his previously published two-volume
history. In Adele Freedman’s collection of articles published in a major Canadian
newspaper, she offers the reader some insight into the architectural issues that attracted
public attention during the 1980s.
Bernstein, William, and Ruth Cawker, Toronto: Fitzhenry and Whiteside, 1982;
revised edition, Markham, Ontario: Fitzhenry and Whiteside, 1988
Freedman, Adele, Toronto, New York, and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990
Gowans, Alan, Toronto and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1958; revised and
enlarged edition, as Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1966
Kalman, Harold, 2 vols., Toronto and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994; as
1 vol., Toronto: Oxford University Press Canada, 2000

Maitland, Leslie, Jacqueline Hucker, and Shannon Ricketts, Peterborough and
Deddington: Broadview Press, 1992
Simmons, Geoffrey, (bilingual English-French edition), Ottawa: Society for the
Study of Architecture in Canada, 1992
Wright, Janet, Toronto; Buffalo, New York; and London: University of Toronto
Press, 1997

CANBERRA, AUSTRALIA

Canberra (Australian Capital Territory) provides a showcase of Australian planning and
architecture during the 20th century. The first parliament of the Commonwealth of
Australia met in

Melbourne in 1901. An international competition for the federal capital city of
Canberra was conducted in 1911 and was won by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion
Mahony Griffin of Chicago.

The so-called Departmental Board Plan was under way by 1913, designed by
bureaucrats using features assembled from the competition entries. This procedure and its
ugly product caused a public outrage, so Griffin visited Australia in late 1913, when he
was appointed director of Federal Capital Works. The Griffins thus settled in Australia in
May 1914, but their Canberra Plan was frustrated by wartime conditions, by quickly
changing governments, and by hostile public servants—the authors of the discarded
conglomerate plan. Griffin, having achieved very little, resigned in 1920 from any further
involvement in Canberra. In 1921 Sir John Sulman headed the Federal Capital Advisory
Committee, which was formed to procure the construction of the city and its suburbs. He
fashioned a sparse garden suburbia and “introduced a modified mediterranean style of red
tile roofs, white stucco walls, [and] simplified classical details.”

The Griffins’ Canberra Plan (1911, revised 1918) was consistent with the City
Beautiful movement and with precedents by Daniel Burnham (e.g., the Chicago Plan,
1909). The basic geometry of the Griffins’ Plan was put in place: the Land Axis,
connecting Mount Ainslie, Capitol Hill, and a mountain peak beyond; the bisecting Water
Axis; and the overlay of a triangle of broad avenues between Capitol Hill and the Civic
and Municipal Centres via two bridges across the lake basin. These elements were fitted
majestically into the terrain, but the building types that the Griffins had named for the key
nodes were not adhered to. Their crystalline suburban road network was not established;
of their building designs in Canberra, only a military general’ gravestone survives intact.

Capitol Hill had been the site for the Griffins’ major 1911 competition landmark, a
national cultural archive building, a “ziggurat” that included imagery of Hellenic tombs
and Oriental temples. The politicians in 1974 legislated that Capitol Hill instead become
the site for a new parliament building. However, in 1914 Griffin had organized and then
withdrawn a wartime international competition for a new parliament building on Camp
Hill, a less elevated site on the Land Axis between Capitol Hill and the central lake basin.
Louis Sullivan (Chicago), Otto Wagner (Vienna), John Burnet (London), and Victor
Laloux (Paris) had been invited as judges. In 1927 John Smith Murdoch (chief architect,
Commonwealth Works) completed a temporary Parliament House located below Camp
Hill toward the lake. Consequently the politicians and government departments moved to
Canberra from the interim capital, Melbourne.

Public servants have always been reluctant to relocate in Canberra. The city’s
development languished until Robert Gordon Menzies became prime minister in 1949.
Menzies engaged the British town planner William Holford and the British landscape
architect Sylvia Crowe to evaluate Canberra’s prospects (Holford Report, 1957). Holford
described Canberra as “a camel—a horse designed by a committee” and as “suburbs in
search of a city,” and recommended that the Griffins’ denser city proposal be reinstated.
Crowe nevertheless advocated the retention of Canberra as a garden city. The National
Capital Development Commission (NCDC) was formed, directed by John Overall. The
Molonglo River was dammed in 1963; at last the lake system was filled and was
ironically named Lake Burley Griffin. The city has since been extended with distant
suburban satellites on the postwar English model of new towns beyond a greenbelt, each
with a civic center. Central Canberra became a park dotted with white modernist foci, but


today it has improved in amenity and urban coherence as it has been gradually filled in
with buildings.

A new Parliament House competition for Capitol Hill, conducted in 1980, was won by
Romaldo Giurgola (Mitchell/Giurgola Thorp). The ziggurat-like configuration of the
Griffins’ projected capitol (1911) and its landscaped setting (1918) were the inspiration
for Giurgola’s scheme (1988)—the main central bulk of the reinforced-concrete building
complex was contained within two curving retaining walls topped by a huge flagpole
(Holford Report recommendation, 1957) supported by four stanchions ghosting the
Griffins’ originally proposed shape. The House of Representatives and the Senate were
roofed with red tile, each house placed in a courtyard on either side of the curved walls.
The public can still climb Capitol Hill and look down through the skylight on the
Members’ Hall. The Land Axis vista was architecturally emphasized: the colonnade of
Giurgola’s “Great Verandah” entrance appears integrated with the stripped classicism of
Murdoch’s temporary parliament building, today a national portrait gallery.

The NCDC (now disbanded) located a few monumental buildings off the Land Axis
but within the Parliamentary Triangle between Capitol Hill and the lake’s edge. Walter
Bunning (Bunning and Madden and T.E.O’Mahoney) followed the lead of Walter
Gropius and The Architects Collaborative (U.S. Embassy, Athens, 1956) with a classical
peripteral colonnade (National Library of Australia, 1968). Colonel Madigan (Edwards
Madigan Torzillo and Briggs) celebrated the architectural promenade: lofty cubic atrium
and ramps (High Court of Australia Building, 1981) and diagonal and dogleg
passageways through gallery spaces (Australian National Gallery, 1982). Concrete work
by Louis Kahn, fractured forms by Richard Meier, and Paul Rudolph’s design-by-section
methods were the context for Madigan’s idiosyncratic compositions. Lawrence Nield
thematically referred to Palladio’s Villa Rotonda, with compositional strategies and
detailing informed by Le Corbusier (Science and Technology Center, 1988). The prime
minister’s department building (Edmund Barton Offices, 1974) by Harry Seidler was
adjoined to the Triangle; scalloped, precast-concrete beams of great length were
suspended between cylindrical service towers.

The Griffins intended for a community sports and recreation casino to terminate the

Land Axis at the base of Mount Ainslie. Placed there instead was a sepulchral museum
by Emil Sodersteen and John Crust (Australian War Memorial, 1941), twice
sympathetically extended by Denton Corker Marshall (1988, 1999).
Where the Griffins envisaged a civic center—a town hall atop a knoll—nothing was
ever built: this topographical prominence is a lawn that is densely surrounded by cypress
trees. Sulman’s shopping blocks, with pedestrian sidewalks enclosed by arcades and
oggias, were built below it (Sydney and Melbourne Buildings, 1926). Roy Simpson
(Yuncken Freeman Brothers Griffiths and Simpson) formed a distant plaza enclosed by
offices (Civic Offices, 1961) and theaters (Canberra Theatre Center, 1965). Further
around the knoll, Simpson alluded to the Greek temple in gray marble (ACT Law Courts,
962).

Brian Lewis, Roy Simpson, and others were involved in the campus planning of the
nearby Australian National University. Professor Brian Lewis designed the residence
(University House, 1952), and Simpson designed many student and academic department
buildings (for example, University Union Plaza, 1975). Roy Grounds, initially desiring a
shell structure, evolved a paraboloid reinforced-concrete dome in a ring-beam moat


(Australian Academy of Science, 1958). Daryl Jackson and Evan Walker demonstrated
an interest in muscular Brutalist forms in reinforced concrete (Canberra School of Music,
1976).

Markets, a railway station, and a city cathedral were never constructed at the Griffins’
Municipal Centre, but a projected military function was. In their master plan (Russell,
1959) Skidmore, Owings and Merrill incorporated into the forecourt Richard Ure’s
aluminum obelisk (Australian-American Memorial, 1954); the buildings were by Buchan
Laird and Buchan (Russell Defense Group Offices, 1966). The nearby carillon, a gift
from the United Kingdom (Aspen Island, Central Basin, Lake Burley Griffin, 1970), was
by Cameron Chisholm and Nicol.

Belconnen and Woden provide examples of civic center buildings in Canberra’s

satellite suburbs. John Andrews’s works related to the Archigram projects of the 1960s
(WodenTAFE College, 1981) and to International Brutalism (Cameron Offices,
Belconnen, 1972). Concrete blocks and landscaped courtyards dominated the latter,
connected by a “street in the air” to an extensive bus terminal. McConnel Smith and
Johnson (Benjamin Offices, 1979), in similarly conceived public office blocks, color
coded service towers to assist the users’ identification and location of the parts. In
startling contrast, Peter Corrigan (Edmond and Corrigan) referred to late 19th-century
polychrome brick office-warehouses of Melbourne and Sydney (Belconnen Community
Center, 1987). Daryl Jackson also made postmodern reference to traditional brickwork
and school yards (Belconnen College, 1988).
Philip Cox, at another significant outlying site, the Australian Institute of Sport
(Bruce, ACT), designed the dynamic (Bruce National Athletics Stadium, 1977) and the
relatively inert (National Indoor Sports and Training Centre, 1981) in the spirit of 1950s
tensile-steel structures in Melbourne. Daryl Jackson used expressive wave shapes and
tight-skinned surfaces (Swimming Training Halls, 1983) and brightly colored bands
(Basketball Indoor Courts, 1988). Allen Jack and Cottier arranged urban terraces to form
wind-sheltered courts (AIS Halls of Residence, 1988).

The Griffins had proposed in their 1911 drawings to align public buildings along the
lake’s edges, and drew their reflections in the water. However, the Canberra Hospital
(main ward block, Leighton Irwin, 1964, demolished) was, typically, placed in the middle
of its peninsula site. Ashton Raggatt McDougall have recently placed here a series of
building masses (National Museum, 1999) right at the water’s edge, a tactic that will only
enhance the Griffins’ original vision for the city of Canberra.

JEFF TURNBULL
Brutalism; Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); City Beautiful
Movement; Plan of Chicago; Seidler, Harry (Australia)

Further Reading

Canberra: Royal Australian Institute of Architects, A.C.T. Chapter, 1982
Taylor, Jennifer, “The Special Case of Canberra,” in by Taylor, Sydney: Law Book
Company, 1986; 2nd edition, Melbourne: National Educational Division, Royal
Australian Institute of Architects, 1990

CANDELA, FELIX 1910-97

Architect, Spain

Félix Candela’s works in Mexico, the majority of which were executed between 1952
and 1968, provide some of the finest examples of functionality fused with plastic
expression that exist in that nation to date. His forms are extremely reductive and simple,
and his approach is clearly seen in works such as his ultrathin shells, particularly the
hypar shell (1.5 centimeters) of the Cosmic Rays Pavilion (1952) at the new campus of
the National Autonomous University in Mexico City and in the vaults of the Mexico City
Stock Exchange (1955).

Candela’s genius in devising new methods of calculating shell forms is illustrated by a
variety of roof constructions, such as the simple umbrella, and short and long vaults.
These structures attest to his technical expertise and his fluency in geometry as well as
his sense of poetry, as seen in what are widely regarded as his free-edged masterpieces,
Las Manantiales Restaurant (1958), where the structure, consisting of an octagonal
groimed vault composed of four intersecting hypars, appears, lotus-like, to float on the
waters at Xochimilco, and La Jacaranda Night Club, designed in collaboration with Juan
Sordo Madaleno (1957), an innovative shell derived from the intersection of three hypars,
a form in complete harmony with the surrounding shoreline.

Candela arrived in Mexico City in 1939, part of the diaspora of Spanish intellectuals,
architects, artists, and other professionals who were fleeing a country wracked by civil
war. He encountered a vital nation emerging from a decade of revolution and another of
reconstruction. Mexican architects and structural engineers were being called on to
envision and construct innovative, multifunction structures on the city’s unstable subsoil.
Candela flourished in this environment; his work in the design and construction of
prismatic slab shells of the Hidalgo, Convent, and Monte Alpas schools (1953) are
examples of his concern for sound structural design and economy, as is his later work in
designing the Zaragoza and Candelaria Metro Stations (1967). His work in residential
construction is similarly marked by dedication to simplicity, whether in the execution of
single-family homes (Romero residence, 1952) or apartment houses.

His construction firm, Cubiertas ALA, begun in 1950 in partnership with
his brother Antonio and sister Julia, participated in Mexico’s rapid
industrialization in the postwar years, as it completed over 800 factories
and warehouses in the 1950s and 1960s. Of particular significance among
these works were those shells constructed for Bacardi and Company: the
Bacardi Distillery (1955) and Bacardi Bottling Plant (1960), the former
including a large, thin handkerchief dome over the fermenting tanks
derived from a sphere of 24 m radius. These works, along with the Ciba
Laboratories (1953), Aceros de Monterrey factory (1955), Lederle
Laboratories (1955), and the High Life Textile Factory (1955), yield

evidence of the considerable creative energies and resources dedicated to

industrialization at that time, as well as attesting to Candela’s growing

fluency in the development of shell forms.

Throughout his career Candela stressed the limited nature of architecture. Unlike other
architects and engineers practicing in postrevolutionary Mexico, such as Ricardo
Legorreta, Alvaro Aburto, Enrique del Moral, and others, Candela did not believe that
architecture could rectify complex social problems. As his works progressed from
experimental funicular vaults to cylindrical shells and various umbrellas to the free-edge
hypar, and in collaboration with prominent architects such as Enrique del Mora and
Mario Pani, he continued to emphasize efficiency and economy. His final work in
Mexico, the Palacio de Deportes for the 1968 Olympic Games, manifests his talents in
structural mechanics and design.

Yet his work cannot be seen as strictly utilitarian. In his design of the Church of the
Virgen de la Medalla Milagrosa (1953), he employed hyperbolic paraboloids to yield a
concrete roof of only 4 centimeters’ thickness, a sign of his technical genius. The
resulting interior, however, indicates much more: the resulting internal space evokes the
solemnity and mystery of Gothic architecture, a dramatic play of light and shadow that
envelops and transports the worshiper to a different plane.

PATRICE OLSEN

Legorreta, Ricardo (Mexico); del Moral, Enrique (Mexico)

Biography

Born 27 January 1910, Madrid, Spain. Studied architecture at the Escuela Superior de
Arquitectura in Madrid; graduated and began professional practice in 1935. Received a
grant from the Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando (Spain) for study in Germany
936; with the outbreak of civil war in Spain remained in Madrid, served the Republican
cause in the Comandancia de Obras in Albacate, later promoted to Captain of the
Engineers. Exiled to Mexico, chartered by the Society of Friends; arrived in Veracruz
939. Worked in Chihuahua and Acapulco 1939-42. Formed partnership in Mexico City
with another Spanish refugee, Jesis Marti 1942-46. Married Eladia Martin. Founded
with his brother Antonio and sister Julia the construction firm Cubiertas ALA,
specializing in design and construction of reinforced-concrete shell structures. Professor,
Escuela Nacional de Arquitectura)s UNAM 1953-70; University of Illinois-Chicago
971-78. Received Gold Medal of the Institute of Structural Engineers 1961; Auguste
Perret Prize of the UIA 1961; the Plomada de Oro from the Sociedad de Arquitectos
Mexicanos 1963; the Grand Medaille d’Argent de la Recherche et de la Technique,
Académic d’Architecture, Paris (1980); the Medalla de Oro of the Consejo Superior de
Colegios de Arquitectos de Espafia, Granada 1981; the Premio Antonio Camufias, Madrid
985. Named Charles Eliot Norton Professor of Poetry, Harvard University 1961-62;
Jefferson Memorial Professor, University of Virginia 1966; Andrew D.White Professor-
at-large, Cornell University 1969-74; honorary professor, Escuela Superior de
Arquitectura de Madrid 1969; William H.Wood Chair of Architecture, University of
Leeds 1974-75; honorary professor, Universidad Nacional Federico Villareal, Lima
977. Emigrated to the United States 1971; became a naturalized citizen 1978. Died in
997.


Selected Works

Fernandez Factory, San Bartolo, México, 1950
Pisa Warehouse, San Bartolo, México, 1951
Cosmic Rays Pavilion (with Jorge Gonzalez Reyna), UNAM, Ciudad Universitaria,
Mexico City, 1952
Church of the Virgen de la Medalla Milagrosa, Mexico City, 1953
Hérdez Warehouse, San Bartolo Naucalpan, México, 1955
Lederle Laboratories, Coapa, México, 1955
Bacardi Distillery, La Galarza, Matamoros, Puebla, México, 1955
High Life Textile Factory, Coyoacan, México, 1955
Stock Exchange (with Enrique del Mora), México City, 1955
Coyoacan Market Hall, Mexico City, 1956
Music Pavilion (with Mario Pani), Unidad Santa Fe, México, 1956
Insignia, Tequesquitengo, Morelos, Mexico, 1957
La Jacaranda Night Club (with Juan Sordo Madaleno), Hotel El Presidente, Acapulco,
Guerrero, México, 1957
Las Manantiales Restaurant (with Joaquin Alvarez Ordofiez), Xochimilco, México,
1958
Chapel of San Vicente de Paul (with Enrique del Moral), Coyoacan, México, 1960
John Lewis Store (with Yorke, Rosenberg and Mardall), Stevenage, Herefordshire,
England, 1963
Zaragoza Metro Station, Mexico City, 1967
Candelaria Metro Station, Mexico City, 1967
Palacio de Deportes for the Olympic Games (with Enrique Castafieda and Antoni
Peyri), Magdalena Mixhuca, México, 1968
University of King Abdulaziz (as consultant of Project Planning
Associates), Jidda, Saudi Arabia, 1975

Selected Publications

“Candela dice,” (México) 33 (May-June 1968)

“Cubierta prismatica de hormigén en la ciudad de México,” (México) (March 1950)
“Design and Construction in Mexico: Shell Construction,” (September 1961)
“Divagaciones estructurales en torno al estilo,” 15 (May 1953)

Bilbao: Xarait Ediciones, 1985
“Estereoestructuras,” 17 (May 1953)

“Estructuras laminares parabdlico-hiperbolicas,” | (Madrid) (December 1955)
“Hacia una nueva filosofia de las estructuras,” (México) 2 (1961)
“The Shell as a Space Encloser,’ (January 1955)

“Shell Structure Development,” (January 1967)

“Simple Concrete Shell Structures,” (December 1951)

“Toward a New Structure,” (January 1956)

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, “Simplified Vaulting Practice,’ (September 1953)
Bowman, Waldo, “Umbrellas over Mexico City’s New Buildings,” (May 1957)
Boyd, Robin, “Engineering of Excitement,” (November 1958)
Buschiazzo, Félix E., Buenos Aires: Institute de Arte Americano e Investigaciones
Estéticas, 1961
Campbell, Betty, “Félix Candela,” (July-September 1959)

“Candela: The Man Who Gave Concrete a Free Rein,” (Spring 1998)
Cervera, Jaime, et al., “Felix Candela, ‘in memoriam,’” 58 (January-February 1998)
Cetto, Max L, Stuttgart: Hatje, 1961; as translated by D.Q. Stephenson, New
York: Praeger, and London: Tiranti, 1961
Cueto Ruiz-Funes, Juan Ignacio del, “Félix Candela, el mago de los cascarones,”

(Winter 1997)

Faber, Colin, | New York: Reinhold, and London: Architectural Press, 1963
Gonzalez Gortazar, Fernando (editor), Mexico City: Consejo Nacional para la
Cultura y las Artes, 1994
Holmes, Burton, and Thomas Creighton, “Recent Work of Mexico’s Felix Candela: Can
a Man Be Architect, Engineer, and Builder?” (February 1959)

McCoy, Esther, “Concrete Shell Forms—Félix Candela,” (May 1957)
Mereles, Louise Noelle, “A Master Builder in Mexico,” 13 (1991)
Pinoncelly, Salvador, “La obra de Felix Candela,” 2 (July 1961)
Poniatowska, Elena, “Candela: El salto mortal de la arquitectura,’ (May 1961)
Robina, Ricardo, “La iglesia,” (December 1961)

Segui Buenaventura, Miguel, (exhib. cat.), Madrid: Institute Juan de Herrera, 1994
Sharp, Dennis, “Sharp Angles: Umbrella Shells Mark a Watershed in Stevenage:
Architects (1963): Felix Candela, with Yorke, Rosenberg, and Mardall,” (Winter 1995)
Smith, Clive Bamford, New York: Architectural Books, 1967

CARACAS, VENEZUELA

In the early 20th century, Venezuela’s economy changed from agriculture to oil
production. For Caracas, its capital, this change implied growing in less than 100 years
from just over 100,000 to more than four million people. With an area more than 300
times larger, the originally compact town between two creeks had expanded all over the
valley.

Caracas’s present appearance, and what is likely to prevail as its structure, is a product
of the 20th century, expressing the paradigms of modernity with the shortcomings of
historical disruptions and exaggerated optimism. Without a city project, unwilling to
preserve a past it is eager to overcome, and open to foreign influences because of both
intense and diverse immigration and its traditional inclusiveness, Caracas has myriad
distinct and diffuse enclaves.

Founded in 1567, Caracas had, by the late 18th century, the size and structure that it
would have at the start of the 20th century. After the death of dictator Juan Vicente
Gomez (1935) and the return of government activities, this humble armature proved
inappropriate for the capital emerging from those new conditions, and reflections
flourished. In 1939, a team coordinated by French designer Maurice Rotival proposed to
expand the city east and south with a system of diagonal avenues and gridded streets,
stretching out the foundational grid with a pattern more able to interact with the valley’s
topography.

Although political turmoil prevented Rotival’s plan from being pursued, the urban
awareness that it awakened affected the city’s form. Its building paradigms supported the
first systematic urban codes (1942), applied on La Candelaria, the easternmost district of
traditional downtown. Its fanlike plan modeled San Bernardino, a new section on the
town’s northeast edge. Further east, Roche’s Altamira relied on monumental avenues and
civic spaces for urbanizing a still-unconquered land. Although Avenida Bolivar, the
plan’s major urban space and its only initiated part, still awaits completion (even after
Carlos Gémez’s Parque Vargas project of the 1980s), it has become the city’s most
emblematic promenade.

Being French, Roche and Rotival’s proposals evoked Parisian urban-planning
paradigms. Dependencies from agricultural times had Venezuela looking to Europe for
models; speaking French and following Paris’s fashion was a symbol of architectural
sophistication.

In fact, Venezuelan architects trained in France were to develop these urban
transformations, displaying in the 1930s and 1940s a body of work still among the city’s
best. Among others, Carlos Raul Villanueva’s (1900-75) El Silencio (1942), a housing
district on the western end of Avenida Bolivar; Luis Malaussena’s (1900-62) Edificio
Paris (1948), a skillfully articulated urban block; Carlos Guinand’s (1889-1963) Casa
Taurel (1941), an urban later to become a model in residential neighborhoods; and, very
specially, Cipriano Dominguez’s (1904-95) Centre Simon Bolivar (1949), an urban
compound of government offices, retail spaces, squares, and parking facilities, introduced
elements of modern architecture and a completely new urban monumentality. Architects
coming from Europe would support and enrich these transformations. These architects
include Manuel Mujica-Millan (Vitoria, 1897; Mérida, 1965), whose well-tempered
eclecticism gained him the favor of both government and aristocracy, allowing him to
build some of Caracas’s first International Style buildings, and Arthur Kahn (Istanbul,
1910), whose Altamira building finely integrated urban grandeur and modern linearity in
a piece that still commands this district’s main space.

New economic conditions also brought new influences. With the increasing presence
of American companies and the international scenario resulting from World War II,
attention shifted from Europe to the United States. This shift correspondingly marked the
replacement of urban design concerns by city-planning tools and of the influence of
Beaux-Arts principles by those of International Style. Expressing this change are the
Military Academy (1951) by Luis Malaussena and the Central University Campus (1945—
65) by Carlos Rat] Villanueva. Whereas Academia Militar, ceremonially approached
along Los Préceres promenade, elaborates on classical monumentality with somewhat
abstract devices, Ctudad Universitaria’s spatial interactions, playful corridors, and ever-


changing territories of light and shadow introduce, with the rigor of its author’s Beaux-
Arts training, values of modernity that were to become quintessential to Caracas.

Architects now trained in the United States began to practice in an active
situation that soon produced remarkable modern buildings.
Simultaneously, under the guiding presence of Villanueva, these young
architects participated in the founding of the School of Architecture (1955)
at the Universidad Central de Venezuela. With Torre Polar (1957) by
Vegas and Galia, Hotel Humboldt (1956) by Tomas José Sanabria, and
even Ciudad Universitaria opening or just being built, the city adopted

Overview of Section of Avenida
Bolivar, Caracas, Venezuela (1996)

© Pablo Corral Vega/CORBIS

new architectural principles that guided the education of architects to come.

American planner Francis Violich’s Piano Regulador de Caracas (1951) had no overall
formal premise; instead, it evolved from land patterns of farms and villages along the
main road built parallel to the river. Violich’s plan turns that road into the main urban
connector and turns existing farms into urban pockets to be developed as independent
compounds. Loose as the plan proved to be, it established the urban system.

Under the excitement of new paradigms and prosperous circumstances, professional
skills gained abroad and passed to new students resulted in some remarkable designs.
Jorge Romero-Gutiérrez’s Helicoide (1955), a strip of retail spaces wrapped around Roca
Tarpeya hill; the lightness of Fruto Vivas’ Club Tachira (1956) roof floating over the hill;
and the folded structures of Alejandro Pietri’s Estacién de Teleférico (1956) formed an
exciting imventory of buildings. Projects by foreign architects, such as Don Hatch’s


rationalist Edificio Mobil (1959), Emile Vestuti’s urban articulations at Banco Union
(1955), and Angelo di Sapio’s dynamic Edificio Atlantic (1956), brought Caracas local
and international acclaim.

The coherent housing experiments developed at Taller de Arquitectura del Banco
Obrero (TABO) permanently linked modern paradigms and hopes to Caracas’s
landscape. Under Villanueva’s management, with the participation of young architects
such as José Manuel Mijares and Carlos Celis-Cepero, TABO developed an ambitious
public housing plan of high quality, modeled after Le Corbusian models. From Guido
Bermidez’s Cerro Grande (1955) to “23 de enero” neighborhood (1955) or El Paraiso
housing blocks (1957) and even beyond the now obvious mistakes of these urban
strategies, TABO established modern convictions in the architectural context of Caracas.

In the early 1960s, affected by economic depression and a growing indifference from
both government and public opinion, this promising environment seemed to fade into
mediocre buildings. Public investment concentrated on infrastructure, making highway
bridges and ramps the most significant constructions of the decade, their heroic scale both

marking and disrupting the existing urban fal

bric.

This crisis extended itself well into the 1970s because of architectural education and

standards. This situation sadly coincided
encouraged by protective housing progr
architecture was enlivened by the mostly ri
1932); the Louis Kahn-inspired work of

with times of urban growth, which was
ams and laws. The heritage of modern
esidential work of Jimmy Alcock (Caracas,
Diquez, Gonzalez, and Rivas; the few but

remarkable buildings by Gorka Dorronsoro (Caracas, 1939); and Jests Tenreiro’s
(Valencia, 1936) early houses.

In the early 1970s, an underground transportation project was started; its first line
opened in 1983. Directed by Max Pedemonte (Havana, 1936), the Metro project also
clarified and qualified urban spaces along the lines. Despite the questionable quality of
some actual interventions, the new public areas and pedestrian links allowed by them
substantially transformed the way in which Caracas was used, connected, and understood.

Through emerging figures such as Carlos Gomez de Llarena (Zaragoza, 1939), Pablo
Lasala (Zaragoza, 1940), Jorge Rigamonti (Milan, 1940), and Oscar Tenreiro (Caracas,
1939), the 1970s recuperated design interest and care. With Jess Tenreiro, Gomez and
Lasala founded in 1976 the Institute de Arquitectura Urbana, an independent research
organization that introduced issues of urban architecture and marked a new generation of
architects, such as Joel Sanz (Higuerote, 1947) and Federico Vegas (Caracas, 1950), who,
in competitions, exhibitions, and publications, promoted a more inclusive and complex
understanding of the city.

Perhaps the most comprehensive planning effort of this kind was the new zoning code
plan promoted by the city authority (1993-95). Acknowledging Caracas’s fragmentary
condition, different design groups were assigned different city sections to identify
character, analyze problems, and promote potential solutions. Following a coding
armature agreed on as an overall team, specific zoning regulations were designed for each
area, realizing order not from borrowed paradigms but from the city’s own form, history,
and structure. Conducted by Francisco Sesto (Vigo, 1943), the project was developed,
among others, by Enrique Larrafiaga (Caracas, 1953) and Fernando Lugo (San Juan,
1953), who also proposed a new Building Codes Ordinance (1995) to coherently support


the urban design strategy. Unfortunately, authorities resulting from the following election
did not pursue the project.

Today, Caracas is still growing intensely and often puzzlingly. Unlike the town of the
1900s, this city is decidedly modern; like its earlier incarnation, however, it still lacks a
plan.

ENRIQUE LARRANAGA
Villanueva, Carlos Raul (Venezuela)

Further Reading

Gasparini, Graziano, and Juan Pedro Posani, Caracas: Fundacion Fina Gomez, 1969
Moreno, Juan, Caracas: Institute del Patrimonio Cultural, 1998
Nifio Araque, William, and Pedro Mendoza, —_ Caracas: Fundacion Corp Group, Centre
Cultural, 1998
Valery S., Rafael, Marta Vallmitjana A., and Alberto Morales Tuker,
Caracas: Institute de Urbanismo, Facultad de Arquitectura y Urbanismo, Universidad
Central de Venezuela, 1990
Vallmitjana A., Marta, et al., Caracas: Institute de Urbanismo, Facultad de
Arquitectura y Urbanismo, Universidad Central de Venezuela, 1991

CARRERE AND HASTINGS

Architecture firm, United States

Carrére and Hastings’ designs of the early 20th century evoked the essence of the
American Renaissance and Beaux-Arts classicism. Simple, understated forms as well as
their coherent use of materials resulted in elegant compositions and French classical
motifs.

John Mervin Carrére (1858-1911) left Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to study architecture in
Switzerland and eventually in Paris, at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, where he met his future
partner. Hastings (1860-1929), a native New Yorker, joined the architectural division of
the furniture-making and decorating firm Herter Brothers after study at Columbia
University. He worked mainly under the guidance of Charles Atwood, who at that time
was busy designing W.H.Vanderbilt’s residence on Fifth Avenue. Both men settled in
New York City in 1883, where they worked for the firm of McKim, Mead and White.

It was not until 1886—when Henry Flagler commissioned Carrére and Hastings (not
McKim, Mead and White) to build a hotel in St. Augustine, Florida—that the new
partnership officially opened offices. The success of the hotel’s Spanish Renaissance
design established the firm and brought other commissions from Flagler, who along with
John D.Rockefeller had established the American institution of Standard Oil.

Carrére and Hastings would spend the next four years under Flagler’s wing as they
assisted in the creation of what the oil baron coined the “American Riviera.” The Ponce

de Leon (1888) was followed shortly thereafter by the Alcazar (1888), in which Spanish
and Moorish motifs intermingled. The two architects not only looked to their past designs
but also employed other influences that were appropriate to St. Augustine’s Spanish past.
The historical background of the city, as well as the designers’ own interpretation of the
Spanish style, formed the basis for the structures. In addition to the unique design, the
construction was significant in that the architects used an innovative combination of
concrete and coquina stone (a mixture of shell and coral). Flagler could not pay the
architects in cash, and their fortune was secured when they were paid in Standard Oil
stock.

Carrére and Hastings were responsible for designing some of the most luxurious
country houses in the United States. Their work reached from Palm Beach, with Flagler’s
Whitehall mansion (1902), to Long Island, with the William K. Vanderbilt, Jr., residence
(1903) in Long Neck, both sumptuous buildings whose elaborate landscaping and
gardens existed as an extension of the house plans. The architecture was articulated by
conforming to the layout of the grounds; as a result, the design of the house was initially
conceived from within. The exterior elements, although important signifiers of style,
became a secondary consideration.

Despite their important business and personal connections, it was Carrére and Hastings’
ingenuity that ensured their professional success when they won the commission for the
New York Public Library in 1897 over rivals McKim, Mead and White. The New York
City Library was probably the most vital of Carrére and Hastings’ creations as it marked
the introduction of Beaux-Arts architecture into the realm of civic building. Unlike their
hotels in St. Augustine, the library competition guidelines were strict and therefore
required conservatism and political savvy; the architects’ solution was to embrace a
French Renaissance Revivalism. The French Beaux-Arts style was easily adapted for
such a project because of the general association with France and French culture, most
notably Henri Labrouste’s influential Bibliothéque Ste. Genevieve of 1851, a luxurious
edifice that had established a standard for library buildings.

Carrére and Hastings’ design was undoubtedly chosen because it best
combined the necessary structural elements into one unified mass,
achieved by using ornamental detail in a way that made the parts come
together in a harmonious whole, an effect that is evident in the
entranceway. The triple arcade within the central pavilion projects from
the mass of the building and is flanked by decorative niches that house
sculptural details. The large arched windows flanking each side of the
entrance indicate the location of the large reading rooms within and are
just one example of external design expressing internal


New York Public Library, New York
City, designed by John Carrére and
Thomas Hastings (1897-1911)

© Museum of the City of New York,
NY Print Archives

function. However, it is in the rear of the building where this concept is most
successful. The lower wall consists of divided windows housed in narrow slits that
illuminate the book stacks, and the iron stacks are duplicated on the facade by stack-
shaped windows. This modernist cue was used to soften the otherwise conservative
design and symbolized Hastings’ architectural doctrine “that direct and honest treatment
of modern problems need not imply stark ugliness nor bizarre novelty of ornament.” The
firm spent 14 years building the New York Public Library. It was this commission, along
with Carrére’s involvement in the Pan-American Exposition, that substantiated the firm
and secured their national popularity. They subsequently secured other New York
commissions including Richmond Borough Hall (1906), the New Theater (1909), and the
design for the Manhattan Bridge (1911) as well as the House and Senate Office Buildings
(1906) in Washington, D.C. In the end, the opening of the library in 1911 would have
been a grand and auspicious occasion if not for the sudden death of Carrére, who had

died unexpectedly two months earlier, after being fatally injured by a taxicab.
JENNIFER NOELLE THOMPSON

Library; McKim, Mead and White (United States)

Biography

John Mervin Carrére

Born in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 9 November 1858. Studied at the Institute Breitenstein,
Switzerland; attended the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris, where he met Thomas Hastings;
graduated 1882. Joined the firm of McKim, Mead and White, New York 1883. Opened
office with Hastings, New York 1886; appointed chief architect for the Pan-American
Exposition, Buffalo, New York 1891. Director and instructor, the American Academy at
Rome. Fellow, American Institute of Architects 1891. Devoted end of his career to urban
planning for Hartford, Connecticut, and Cleveland, Ohio. Died 1 March 1911.

Thomas Hastings

Born in New York City, 1 March 1860. Studied at Columbia University, New York;
attended the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris, where he met John Mervin Carrére; graduated
1884. Joined the firm of McKim, Mead and White, New York 1884. Opened office with
Carrére, New York 1886. Fellow, American Institute of Architects 1892. Maintained the
office under the original tutelage after Carrére’s death. Gold Medal, Royal Institute of
British Architects 1922; Chevalier, Legion of Honor, France. Died in New York, 23
October 1929.

Firm of Carrére and Hastings

Founded in New York City 1886; lasted until Carrére’s death in 1911; operated primarily
in New York; famous works include the Ponce de Leon Hotel, St. Augustine, Florida
1888 and the New York Public Library 1911.

Selected Works

Ponce de Leon Hotel, St. Augustine, Florida, 1888
Alcazar Hotel, St. Augustine, Florida, 1888
Grace Methodist Episcopal Church, St. Augustine, Florida, 1888
Flagler Memorial Presbyterian Church, St. Augustine, Florida, 1890
Whitehall, Palm Beach, Florida, 1902
William K. Vanderbilt, Jr., Residence, Long Island, New York 1903
Senate Offices, Washington, D.C., 1905
House of Representatives Offices, Washington, D.C., 1906
Richmond Borough Hall, New York City, 1906
New Theater (Century Theater), New York City, 1909
New York Public Library (First prize, 1897 competition), New York City, 1911
Manhattan Bridge and Approaches, New York City, 1911
City Hall, Portland, Maine, 1911

Hastings Continuing in Firm’s Name after Death of Carrére
Cunard Building, New York City (with Benjamin W.Morris), 1921
Macmillan Building, New York City, 1924
Standard Oil Building, New York City, 1926

Devonshire House, Piccadilly, London, 1926

Selected Publications

(Carrére, with A.W.Brunner), 1909
“On the Evolution of Style” (Hastings), 97 (1910)

Further Reading

There is very little scholarship on the firm Carrére and Hastings. However, both
principals wrote articles found in architectural journals of their day. In addition, they are
always mentioned in texts about Beaux-Arts and the American Renaissance. See Blake’s
dissertation for the only scholarly text that spans the firm’s entire career. See Doumato
for complete bibliographies on Carrére and Hastings that include their own writings.
Blake, Curtis Channing, “The Architecture of Carrére and Hastings,” Ph.D. diss.,
Columbia University, 1976
Desmond, Harry W., “The Complete Works of Messers Carrére and Hastings,”
(January 1912)
Doumato, Lamia, (bibliography), Monticello, Illinois: Vance Bibliographies, 1985
Doumato, Lamia, (bibliography), Monticello, Illinois: Vance Bibliographies, 1988
Hastings, Thomas, edited by David Gray, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1933

CARSON PIRIE SCOTT STORE

Designed by Louis Sullivan, completed 1904 Chicago, Illinois

The Carson Pirie Scott (originally the Schlesinger and Mayer) Store in Chicago,
designed and built in 1898-1904, was the last large commercial structure designed by
Louis Sullivan. In later modernist historiography, this building was acclaimed for its
forthright expression of steel-and-glass construction in its upper elevations. As such,
Carson Pirie Scott was seen as a forerunner of the International Style in commercia.
architecture of the mid-20th century, epitomized by the later tall buildings of Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe. Carson Pirie Scott was also pivotal in the international development
of the department store as a building type in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. From a
Postmodernist perspective of the 1980s, the building’s outstanding feature is Sullivan’s
ornamental enrichment of the show-window frames along the two-story base that served
to enhance the display of apparel to a largely female clientele.

Since 1881 the retail dry-goods firm of Leopold Schlesinger and David Mayer had
occupied parts of a preexisting structure on the southeast corner of State and Madison
Streets at the center of Chicago’s retail shopping corridor along State Street. Over the
years Schlesinger and Mayer had commissioned the firm of Adler and Sullivan (and
afterward Louis Sullivan alone) to design remodelings and expansions of their quarters.
The principal client was David Mayer, who commissioned Sullivan’s design for the new
Schlesinger and Mayer Store, first announced in May 1898. By this time, a group of new


and projected buildings for retailing created by nearby competitors, as well as the high
annual rental value of the corner property, had accentuated the need for a new building on
the site. Sullivan’s original design called for a uniformly 12-story steel-frame structure,
including a rounded corner tower recalling that of the earlier building on the site. The
original design also featured a cladding of white Georgia marble for the steel frame above
the two-story base (the marble was changed to white enameled terra-cotta as built) and
cast bronze for the ornamentally elaborate frames of the show windows on the lower two
floors (the bronze became painted cast iron as built). The first three-bay section of the
new Schlesinger and Mayer Store, built late in 1899, was only nine stories tall because of
a height limit of 120 feet imposed on tall buildings by Chicago’s city council. A
relaxation of that limit to 240 feet in 1902 enabled construction of the corner and State
Street sections of the building in 1903-04 to the originally designed height of 12 stories,
extending seven bays down State Street south of the rounded corner.

The new building opened in October 1903 with additional interior work continuing
into the spring of 1904. After the dissolution of the Schlesinger and Mayer firm, Carson
Pirie Scott and Company acquired control of the building in August 1904. In December,
Carson’s commissioned D.H.Burnham and Company to add five bays to Sullivan’s 12-
story structure, extending it 104 feet farther south on State Street. In 1948 the
overhanging cornice and top-floor colonnade along the whole building were removed and
replaced by a low parapet wall. In 1960-61 Holabird and Root designed an eight-story
addition adjoining the Burnham bays to the south on State Street. In 1979 Carson Pirie
Scott commissioned architect John Vinci to partially restore their landmark building,
including cleaning the terra-cotta and replacing damaged pieces, repainting the cast-iron
base to approximate Sullivan’s original treatment, and restoring the main corner
vestibule’s interior. The structure has been in continuous use as a department store since
it opened over a century ago.

When it was first completed, the Schlesinger and Mayer Store was considered a model
for a modern department store and a major work in Sullivan’s oeuvre. Sullivan’s style of
ornamental ironwork along the base was related to the processes of show-window display
and newspaper advertising of women’s apparel, whose seasonal variations and elaborate
lacework corresponded to the ornament’s foliate motifs and intricate design. Like other
stores nearby, the first- and second-story plate-glass show windows also had upper lights
filled with Luxfer prismatic glass to refract daylight into the depths of the sales floors.
Originally, the store’s architectural interiors included a third-floor ladies waiting and
writing room and an eighth-floor restaurant featuring ornamentally elaborate sawed
mahogany screens and columns with capitals of ornamental plasterwork, like the capitals
visible atop the columns of the corner vestibule and the first, second, third, and fourth
sales floors.

The need to maximize spatial openness and interior daylight for shopping
(in an era when arc lamps were still the principal interior electrical fixtures
for such buildings) led to Sullivan’s design for the upper exterior
elevations of Chicago windows (a wide, central, fixed glass pane flanked
on either side by an operable sash window). Sullivan’s upper fenestration
is distinguished by its precise proportions (windows twice as wide as they

are high, columns one-sixth the width of windows, and lintels between


stories one-half the height of windows) and reveals of ornamental terra-
cotta, a detail not reproduced in the Burnham bays down State Street.
Overall, the Carson Pirie Scott Store exemplified Sullivan’s often stated
commitment to a modern American architecture wherein forms followed
functions, in this case meaning the criteria of a department store as a novel
building type then undergoing rapid development in metropolitan centers
such as Chicago’s State Street. Like Adler and Sullivan’s and Sullivan’s
own earlier tall office buildings of the 1890s, as well as Sullivan’s series
of later bank buildings from 1906, Carson Pirie Scott exhibits the
characteristics of Sullivan’s architec-

Carson Pirie Scott Store, Chicago,
designed by Louis Sullivan

© Greatbuildings.com

tural style: clear, simple massing; consistently precise proportions; forthright constructive
expression; and botanically inspired ornament rendered in a variety of materials inside
and out. This style embodied his broader aim of creating a modern architecture that
eschewed dependence on historical styles and that would be culturally appropriate for the
United States of the early 20th century.

JOSEPH M.SIRY

Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); Holabird, William, and John

Wellborn Root (United States); International Style; Mies van der Rohe,
Ludwig (Germany); Sullivan, Louis Henry (United States)

Further Reading

The comprehensive monograph on Carson Pirie Scott is by Siry. Other sources listed
below include earlier detailed, or more recent, discussions of the building.

Bonta, Juan P., Barcelona: Gili, 1977; as New York: Rizzoli, and London:
Lund Humphries, 1979
Condit, Carl W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964

Frei, Hans, Zurich: Artemis, 1992
Giedion, Sigfried, | Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, and London:
Oxford University Press, 1941; 5th edition, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press, 1967
Jordy, William H., Volume 3: Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1972;
New York: Oxford University Press, 1986
Jordy, William H., “The Tall Buildings,” in edited by Wim de Wit, New York:
W.W. Norton, 1986
Manieri-Elia, Mario, Milan: Electa, 1995; as © New York: Princeton Architectural
Press, 1996; translated by Antony Shugaar with Caroline Green
Morrison, Hugh, New York: Museum of Modern Art and W.W.Norton, 1935; with
introduction and revised list of buildings by Timothy J. Samuelson, New York:
W.W.Norton, 1998

Siry, Joseph, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988
Twombly, Robert, New York: Viking, 1986; Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1987

CASA MALAPARTE

Designed by Adalberto Libera, completed 1963 Island of Capri

The Casa Malaparte is a villa on the island of Capri designed by the Italian rationalist
architect Adalberto Libera (1903-63) for the writer and journalist Curzio Malaparte
(1898-1957). The building’s dominant position on its rocky outcrop reflect its expressive
and outward-looking spirit. Its bold volumetric form and symmetrical planning reflects
Libera’s desire for “sin cerity, order, logic and clarity above all” (Malaparte, 1989). All in
all, it is a textbook example of modernist 20th-century architecture. At first glance, this
might seem to be an accurate description of the Casa Malaparte. However, a closer
examination reveals these seemingly uncontestable facts as increasingly problematic.

The Casa Malaparte is actually a curious and contradictory work that directly reflects
the nature of its curious and contradictory client: Curzio Malaparte. Born Kurt Erich
Suckert into a Protestant family, Malaparte denounced these roots when beginning his
writing career by taking his mother’s maiden name and then later, on his deathbed,
converting to Catholicism. Malaparte is best known for his writings that glorified
Mussolini and the Fascist Party, yet he was jailed by that same party between 1933 and
1935. While he subsequently tried to become a member of the Communist Party,
Malaparte also served as a liaison officer for the U.S. Army after World War II. These


examples are only the more concrete ones illustrating a soul who functioned in extremes
and was always torn between opposites.

The architect Adalberto Libera, a member of the rationalist Gruppo 7, is best known
for his works that helped advertise Fascist Italy: the staging of the Exhibition of the Tenth
Anniversary of the Fascist Revolution (1932), and the Italian Pavilions at the World
Expositions of Chicago (1933) and Brussels (1935). It is through these works that
Malaparte most likely became familiar with Libera. Sometime in early 1938, Malaparte
approached Libera to design a small villa on the island of Capri. The resulting design,
which was submitted for approval to the Capri authorities in March 1938, was never
built. For this reason, the attribution of the Casa Malaparte to Adalberto Libera can be
questioned. However, Libera’s initial design, although different from what was actually
built, can be seen as the “foundation” of the eventual building.

Libera proposed a two-story, elongated rectangular building with rooms on one side
and a corridor on the other. The linearity of the project took advantage of the linearity of
its site: the Massullo promontory. The project stepped up in section toward the sea, using
the lower portion’s roof as a sheltered terrace. The external ground-floor walls of the
project consisted of rough stone, presumably from the site, with the upper portion of the
walls plastered smooth. These characteristics of the project can be seen in the building as
built. However, this is where the similarity ends. Sometime during 1939, Libera and
Malaparte lost touch concerning the villa. Without an architect, Malaparte, however,
continued building, acting on advice from his builder, Adolfo Amitriano, and his circle of
artist friends as well as on his own thoughts and inspirations.

The most significant change to Libera’s initial project made by Malaparte is perhaps the
defining element of the Casa Malaparte: the curious wedge-shaped staircase to the roof
that extends for about one-third of the entire structure and gives the building its unique
silhouette. This form has been attributed to Malaparte’s memory of the Church of the
Annunziata, experienced during his exile imposed by the Fascists on the island of Lipari.
The staircase is a strange form, perhaps one that would never be designed by an architect,
yet it solved several problems for Malaparte once he began to deviate from Libera’s
project. First, although oversized, the staircase provided access to the roof terrace, which
Malaparte now placed on the very top of the building. Second, it unified the mass of the
building into a single, streamlined whole instead of a series of awkward jumps, as Libera
had proposed.

This unified mass, isolated on the rocky heights of a Mediterranean cliff, is what gives
the building its heroic and romantic appeal. However, these same characteristics also
strangely make the building belong to its natural surroundings: the building’s linearity
and the gradual slope of the staircase seem to echo the linearity of the site with its gradual
ups and downs. In addition, the color of the building, often described as “Pompeian red,”
is also subject to this paradox: on the one hand, it is not the typical Mediterranean (and
modernist) white, which would make it stand out from its natural surroundings of sea,
rock, and low shrubs; on the other hand, the deep red is completely foreign to an island
setting of natural blue, brown, and green tones.

Casa Malaparte interior, Capri, by
Adalberto Libera

© Roberto Schezen/Esto

Other changes that Malaparte made to Libera’s original design were less noticeable
than the staircase. Windows on the southwest facade were framed with a “braid of tufa
stone,” and iron security bars were installed on the ground floor. It is theorized that
Malaparte did this to make the house seem more like a prison, again evoking memories of
his exile. Yet, unlike a prison, the entire rooftop was to be used for sunbathing, with a
sweeping modesty wall to protect Malaparte from prying eyes.

Libera’s proposed interior configuration was completely changed by Malaparte from a
single-loaded corridor to a sym metrical layout, with the principal room consisting of a
large temple-like salon the entire width of the building. The building’s entrance,
however, was still located on the southwest elevation, and the resulting circulation pattern
is clumsy: once one is inside the principal entrance, an awkward L-shaped stair leads
upstairs to another awkward antechamber before the salon. In addition, to access the new
basement accommodation below the external staircase, a secondary external entrance also
exists on the southwest elevation. Although Malaparte masterfully reorganized the
building into a symmetrical layout that more accurately reflects the linearity of the
scheme, he was unable to follow this through to the circulation through the building.

In the end, the Casa Malaparte is an accurate reflection of the unusual “both/and”
character of its client: it is a combined product of its architect, client, and builder; an
example of both heroic modernism and humble vernacular traditions; an architectural
work that both dominates and engages its natural surroundings; and a house that is both a
prison and a temple. Indeed, Malaparte, on completion of the building, is known to have
described his Capri villa as a “house like me” and “a selfportrait in stone.”

CHRISTOPHER WILSON

Libera, Adalberto (Italy)

Further Reading

Arets, Wiel, and Wim van den Bergh, “ A Sublime Alienation,” 18 (Autumn 1989)
Bostik, Joe, “The Surveyed House,” 60 (1989)
Hejduk, John, “Cable from Milan,” 605 (April 1980)

Malaparte, Curzio, “On the Island of Lipari,’ 18 (Autumn 1989)
McDonough, Michael, “Nature, Surrealism, and Folk Design Methodology in the Casa
Malaparte,” 243, no. 12 (December 1990)

Safran, Yehuda, “On the Island of Capri,” 18 (Autumn 1989)

Savi, Vittorio, “Orphic, Surrealistic: Casa Malaparte on Capri,” 60 (1989)
Talamona, Marida, “Adalberto Libera and Villa Malaparte,” 18 (Autumn 1989)
Talamona, Marida, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992

CASA MILA

Designed by Antoni Gaudi, completed in 1910 Barcelona, Spain

Casa Mila, located at the corner of the Paseo de Gracia and the Calle Provenza in
Barcelona, Spain, was designed and built between 1906 and 1910. It exemplifies the
exuberant forms and distinctly personal architectural sensibility of Antoni Gaudi (1852-
1926), whose work influenced the development the Catalan adaptation of Art Nouveau.
Popularly known as “La Pedrera” (The Quarry), the large apartment building,
commissioned by wealthy businessman Pedro Mila i Camps and his wife, Rosario
Segimén Artells, received widespread critical attention for its massive, undulating facade
and innovative architectural and structural details. Although Casa Mila has been
described as a precursor of the Eimstein Tower (1921) in Potsdam, designed by Erich
Mendelsohn (1887-1953), the explicitly organic references of Gaudi’s structure exhibit
closer stylistic affinities to Art Nouveau (Jugendstil) than to the German Expressionism
of Mendelsohn’s work.

Casa Mila is the last secular project undertaken by Gaudi before devoting his energies
exclusively to the design and construction of the Sagrada Familia (1926), also in
Barcelona. Gaudi began work on the Casa Mila during construction of another private
residence he designed (1906) on the Paseo de Gracia, Casa Battlé. As with the earlier
structure, the serpentine, organic appearance of Casa Mila results from the rhythmic
alternation of concave and convex bays and balconies and is further heightened by the
organic curves of the wrought-iron grillwork. Following a dispute with Mila over the
inclusion of a religious sculpture on the facade of the building, Gaudi abandoned the
project in 1909, leaving its completion to project contractor José Bayo Font. The
building’s interior and exterior decorative finishes were executed by Gaudi’s assistant,
José Jujol. The present appearance of the building reflects the conversion of the attic
structure into apartments, executed by F.J.Barba Corsini in 1954.

The J-shaped plan of Casa Mila contains two internal courtyards whose rounded forms
are consistent with the building’s general lack of orthogonal planes and are echoed in the
building’s facade. One of the most significant aspects of Casa Mila is the open plan of


each floor, achieved by Gaudi’s use of columns rather than masonry bearing walls
throughout the structure. This strategy, which anticipates the free plan advocated by
modernists such as Le Corbusier, allowed architectural and structural autonomy for both
the facade and the individual floors. Additional structural support was provided by an
extensive framework of iron beams embedded in the floors, facade, and balconies,
including an elaborate umbrella-shaped iron structure within the floor of the courtyard
facing the Paseo de Gracia.

Among Gaudi’s numerous innovative design elements was a spiral ramp intended to
provide automobile access from the ground floor down to the basement garage and
continuing up to the top floor of the building. Although the ramp was later deemed too
large for the courtyard and never completed, the idea anticipates by almost 20 years the
internal ramp designed by Le Corbusier for Villa Meyer (1925) in Paris.

Because of the influence of or 19th-century historical eclecticism, in
Barcelona at the time Casa Mila was under construction, the building’s
unconventional facade met with a wide range of critical responses on
completion. The visual plasticity, marine-inspired decorative elements,
and grotto-like lobby spaces of Casa Mila were hailed by some
contemporaries as the pure architectural expression of a Mediterranean
sensibil-

Casa Mila, close-up of entrance and
balconies

© Howard Davis/GreatBuildings.com

Casa Mila (or La Pedrera), Barcelona
(1905-10), Antoni Gaudi

Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan

ity, an interpretation strengthened by Gaudi’s published comments praising
Mediterranean light and shadow. It has also been suggested that the design of Casa
Mila’s facade was influenced by the massive, towered masonry structures of the Berber
tribes in North Africa, a region visited by Gaudi in 1887.

The materials and decoration of the facade of Casa Mila, particularly the use of
Catalonian limestone facing and ornate wrought-iron grillwork, reflect Gaudi’s interest
and background in local craft traditions. These choices also typify Gaudi’s deep
commitment to Catalan culture, which at the turn of the 20th century underwent a
widespread social, political, and economic revival known as the or Catalan
Renaissance.

Gaudi, a devout Catholic and follower of the cult of Mary, also intended Casa Mila to
serve a symbolic religious function. The explicit Marian references embedded in the
building’s facade include an inscription of the prayer of the rosary along the cornice and
a monumental sculpture group of the Virgin and two angels. The sculpture was intended
for a niche in the facade above the corner of the Paseo de Gracia and the Calle de
Provenza. However, a violent outbreak of anticlericalism in Barcelona in 1909 resulted in
the owner’s decision not to include the sculpture; Gaudi abandoned the project soon
afterward.

The undulating attic and roof of Casa Mila serve as a base for the elaborate sculptural
forms housing the building’s ventilation shafts, chimneys, and access structures, which
collectively produce Casa Mila’s distinctive roofline. The roof is celebrated for its
inventive use of Catalan vaults, which are composed of roof tiles laid end on end,
supported by transverse ribs. This technique, which may be compared to concrete
eggshell vaulting, permits great flexibility in the design of the vaults. In addition to the


attic vaults at Casa Mila, which take the form of catenary arches, Gaudi used Catalan
vaults at numerous other projects, including the roof of the school building of the nearby
Sagrada Familia (1909). At Casa Mila, however, the attic arches stretch from the ground
to the roof of the attic structure, recalling the arcaded corridors Gaudi designed for the
Colegio de Santa Teresa de Jestis (1894) in Barcelona.

The decoration of the attic of Casa Mila represents a conflation of Gaudi’s sculptural
design aesthetic with local and regional artistic traditions. His use of brightly colored
ceramic tile fragments embedded in masonry, at Casa Mila, the Park Giiell (1914), and
other projects throughout his career contributed to the Catalan craft revival of the early
20th century. Although Casa Mila has received much critical attention as an Art Nouveau
monument, its sculptural plasticity suggests a more three-dimensional—and more
uniquely personal—design aesthetic than that of Art Nouveau.

KRISTIN A. TRIFF

Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Barcelona, Spain; Catalan (Guastavino)
Vaults; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France)

Further Reading

Barba Corsini, F.J., “Edificio La Pedrera, Barcelona, Espaiia,’ (December 1955)
Collins, George Roseborough, New York: Braziller, and London: Mayflower, 1960
Nonell, Juan Bassegoda, Sabadell, Spain: Ausa, 1989
Nonell, Juan Bassegoda, New York: Abbeville Press, 2000
Schoelkopf, R.J., “Antonio Gaudi: Architect, 1852-1926: Casa Mila,” 2 (1953)
Zerbst, Rainer, Cologne: Taschen, 1985

CATALAN (GUASTAVINO) VAULTS

This historic vaulting technique, popular in Spain and the United States in the early 20th
century, is also called “cohesive construction,” “timbrel vault,” “laminated vault,” (in
France), (“board vault,” in Spain), and (“layered vault” in Italy). It uses thin, flat clay
tiles (about 12 by 6 by 5/8 inches) in laminated shell structures, assembled with an
extremely adhesive and fast-drying mortar into vaults, normally in three or more layers of
overlapping tiles. The enormous stability stems from two major factors: the convergence
of the tiles and mortar into a homogeneous, monolithic material that can absorb both
compression and tension and the thin (single or double) curved surfaces that obtain
additional strength by distributing them sideways as well as downward. Apart from being
fireproof, the vault is lighter than any other masonry vault and produces only minimal
lateral thrust at its springing points. As a result, it allows the placement of openings in the

shell and the easy combination of several units and does not require outside buttressing or
reinforcement beams. Skilled workers can erect even large vaults without scaffolding or
formwork, as the lower rows of laminated clay tiles are usually strong enough when the
mortar has dried to carry the workers placing subsequent layers.

The roots of this vaulting technique can be traced back to medieval and even Roman
sources. The structure would typically be hidden from sight under plaster or suspended
ceilings or used as permanent formwork. The late 19th century developed a new interest
in the technique, which eventually flourished simultaneously in the first half of the 20th
century both in Catalonia, Spain, and in the United States.

In the 1860s it was rediscovered in Catalonia as a cheap method of vaulting spaces for
industrial buildings and warehouses. A prime example is the factory (1869-75; today
called The Clock Building) for the Battlé brothers in Barcelona by Rafael Guastavino.
Father and son Rafael Guastavino exhibited the method with great success at the
Philadelphia World’s Fair and subsequently proceeded to introduce the technique to the
United States. The Guastavino Company (1885-1963) held 24 patents and was involved
in the construction of more than 1,000 buildings all across the United States, Canada, and
11 other countries. During the 40 most active years of the company, the Guastavinos
worked on some of the most spectacular public buildings of the day, including the Boston
Public Library (McKim, Mead and White, 1898), Grand Central Terminal (Warren and
Wetmore, 1913), and Pennsylvania Station (McKim, Mead and White, 1911) in New
York, as well as private commissions, including the Biltmore Estate (Richard Morris
Hunt, 1895) in Asheville, North Carolina. The widest span ever to be achieved with
Guastavino tiles is the 66-foot-wide dome above the crossing of the cathedral of St. John
the Divine (Cram and Ferguson, 1893 and later) in New York. Although American
architects used Guastavino tiles mostly for conventional vaults and domes in historicist
architecture, they frequently chose to expose the typical fish-grate pattern of the tiles on
the underside of a vault or dome without any ornamental embellishment. These patterns
can still be found in countless public structures.

Simultaneously, the method gained popularity among the architects of the Catalan
movement in northeastern Spain. (Although several medieval applications in Catalonia
are known, there is no evidence that the method was exclusive to this region or had
originated there.) Fired by a search for an independent Catalan architectural expression,
several architects fully exploited the technique’s structural and expressive potential for
complex vaults, undulating walls, and rolling ceilings. Among the prime examples are
Antoni Gaudi’s small school building (1906) at the Sagrada Familia cathedral in
Barcelona, which features both a curvilinear outside wall and a wavelike roof structure.
Gaudi’s contemporary, Lluis Doménech i Montaner, used the technique in the Palau de la
Musica Catalana (1905-08) and his Hospital de Sant Paul (1902-10), both in Barcelona.
César Martinell built more than 30 agricultural cooperatives using the tiles in Catalonia
between 1913 and 1919, and Lluis Muncunill i Parellada created perhaps the most radical
application of the technique in his textile factory, Aymerich Amat i Jover (1907-09) in
Terrassa, Catalonia, which features series of double-curved roof elements on cast-iron
posts that both shelter the interior and provide northern skylights.

Eventually, the use of the technique succumbed to rising labor costs and new, cheaper
building methods that began to dominate the building markets in the Western world after
World War II. There were only occasional later applications, as in Luis Moya Blanco’s


St. Augustin church (1954) in Madrid or Le Corbusier’s use of simple, flat Catalan vaults
in his Maison Jaoul (1955) in Paris.

The two most spectacular applications since World War II have occurred outside the
highly industrialized Western building markets. A Catalan mason brought the vaulting
technique in the late 1950s to Cuba, where it was applied to the first major building
project of Fidel Castro’s government, a cluster of five art schools (Ricardo Porro, Vittorio
Garatti, Roberto Gottardi, 1961-65, unfinished) featuring spectacular sequences of domes
and barrel vaults.

The Uruguayan architect Eladio Dieste (b. 1917) has continuously applied
the central principles of the Catalan vault since the late 1950s and
improved it structurally by using steel reinforcement rods and tie bars in
conjunction with doublecurvature brick shells, thus increasing the span of
each unit. Among Dieste’s most stunning creations is a church (1958) in
Atlantida, Uruguay, with undulating walls and ceiling based on a principle
similar to that of Gaudi’s school at the Sagrada Familia.

Palau de la Musica Catalana,
Barcelona (1908), designed by Lluis
Doménech i Montaner

Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan

Equally important is a warehouse (1960) in Montevideo that is spanned by double-curved
laminated shell structures similar to those in Lluis Muncunill’s 1909 textile factory in
Terrassa. The thin laminated masonry vaults have influenced the development of thin
concrete shells (for example, in the work of Spanish architects Edoardo Torroja and Felix
Candela) and Russian experiments with large vaults of prefabricated-concrete elements.
A renewed interest in the technique has led to attempts at reviving the vaulting technique
for the Western building market.

DIETRICH NEUMANN

Barcelona, Spain; Casa Mila, Barcelona; Candela, Felix; Gaudi, Antoni

(Spain); Grand Central Station, New York City; McKim, Mead and White
(United States); Spain

Further Reading

30, no. 4 (1999) (special issue entitled “Preserving Historic Guastavino Tile
Ceilings, Domes, and Vaults”)
Araguas, Philippe, “L’ Acte de naissance de la Boveda tabicada ou le certificat de
naturalisation de la ‘Voie Catalane,’” 156, no. 2 (1998)
Bannister, Turpin C., “The Roussillon Vault: The Apotheosis of a ‘Folk’ Construction,”
27 (October 1968)

Blanco, Luis Moya, Madrid: Ministerio de la Gobernacion, Direccién General de
Arquitectura, 1947; as 2 vols., Madrid: Colegio Oficial de Arquitectos de Madrid,
1993
Brunet, César Martinell, and Ignasi Sola-Morales Rubid, Barcelona: Colegio Oficial
de Arquitectos de Catalufia y Baleares, 1975

Collins, George R., “The Transfer of Thin Masonry Vaulting from Spain to America,”
27 (October 1968)
Gulli, Riccardo, and Giovanni Mochi, Rome: CDP Editrice Edilstampa, 1995
Loomis, John A., New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999
Parks, Janet, and Alan G.Neumann, New York: Avery Architectural and Fine
Arts Library and the Miriam and Ira D.Wallach Art Gallery, Columbia University, 1996

CELEBRATION, FLORIDA

The town of Celebration, designed and built by the Disney Corporation near Orlando,
Florida, is certainly the most prominent—and perhaps the most controversial—of the
second generation of New Urbanism green-field projects. It followed the sole first-
generation new town, Seaside, Florida, by about ten years.

Celebration is the New Urbanist stepchild of Walt Disney’s original vision of EPCOT,
the Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow. Presented in 1966, the drawings
and the animated film showed a full-fledged city, organized as a radial system with

business and commerce at the center, higher density apartments around a greenbelt, and
an outer ring of clean factories and low-density neighborhoods. Shelved at Disney’s
death, the concept of the “Model City” was revived in the late 1980s under the direction
chief operating officer Michael Eisner.

The design of what became Celebration was protracted over many years because it
involved the careful testing of every facet of the project. Among the sources of
inspiration were the reassessed tradition of the Anglo-American suburb, the new towns of
John Nolen (1869-1937), Seaside, Florida, and other examples selected from Werner
Hegemann and Elbert Peet’s (1922). Following a series of competitions involving
architects including Duany and Plater-Zyberk, Robert A.M. Stern, Gwathmey and Siegel,
Helmut Jahn, and Charles Moore, the final master plan was the work of Stern, with
Jaquelin Robertson and Associates. The town was officially launched on the 25th
anniversary of Disney World in October 1996.
Buffered from the highway by golf courses and a 4,700-acre greenbelt of wetlands, the
plan of Celebration remotely resembles EPCOT’s original concept. The half-circular and
radial plan of streets and neighborhoods, distorted by the environmental constraints,
focuses on an artificial lake along which the mixed-use town center develops. A wide
waterfront promenade, complete with a stepped embarcadero, parks, and fountains,
harbors a series of restaurants and cafes stretching from the cinema complex (designed by
Cesar Pelli) to the hotel. The one-block-long Main Street departs from the lake and
terminates in a square, identified by the 52 columns of the town hall (designed by Philip
Johnson), the circular post office (designed by Michael Graves), and the preview center
(by Moore/Anderson Architects) with its Outlook Tower. The public school (by William
Rawn), whose entrance faces a British-like crescent of town houses, is exceptionally
neighborhood friendly.

Inspired by Frederick Law Olmsted’s “Emerald Necklace” (Boston, 1878-95) and
Martin Wagner’s diagram for the greening of Berlin (1910), a system of “green fingers”
penetrates into the town and articulates its neighborhoods. One finger prolongs the main
street, which widens as a parkway on both sides of a canal and terminates at the golf
course; another one bisects the school’s property and embraces its playing fields. Smaller
parks, creeks, and lakes remind of nearby Winter Park—another major inspiration for the
design.

Celebration depends on connectivity and diversity: a system of navigable streets and a
full range of housing types in addition to shops and office, school, and civic buildings.
Most interesting are the Main Street apartments above shops (the open-air circulation is
an innovative solution to the challenge of separate entrances) and the courtyard-type
apartments along the canal. To avoid some of Seaside’s problems, the mixed-use blocks
of the center contain landscaped parking lots, and alleys give access to the private
residential garages. Yet, diversity also meant some concession to more traditional zoning.
The isolated office park or Celebration Place—two of the three buildings centered around
an obelisk were designed by Aldo Rossi and completed in 1996—faces the regional
highway; nearby and in visual contact with the town center is the community hospital.
Residential-only satellite neighborhoods, organized around greens, are not quite in
walking distance of the center.

The controversy swirling around Celebration, eliciting two books in 1999 as well as
countless articles, is due less to its design than to its controlling concept. Its government


is, in fact, a private association—not unlike the tens of thousands of homeowners’ or
property owners’ associations, both common in the suburbs and increasingly in inner
cities across the 50 states; yet, it was attacked as a first case of “private government by
corporation.” Most critics focused on the failure of the original public school’s
curriculum, conceived by Disney in collaboration with the Harvard School of Education.
The experimental curriculum did not match the more conservative aspirations of the
parents, and their civic dissatisfaction was presented as a failure in building a genuine
community. Eventually, they succeeded in changing the course of the school.

Another controversial factor is the code or pattern book, written by Ray Gindroz of
Urban Design Associates (Pittsburgh), that strictly defines the six permitted styles:
Classical, Victorian, Colonial Revival, Coastal, Mediterranean, and French. The issue of
individual freedom has been raised, as the precision and inflexibility of the code are
unmatched in New Urbanism communities. However, the choice made in Celebration
was to risk eliminating the exceptionally good design in order to avoid the kitsch and the
very bad. As a mitigating factor, the civic structures and the mixed-use buildings along
Main Street were not coded, but rather commissioned to first-rate architects who worked
closely together.

Disney’s decision to put the centrally managed main street and shops at the very
center of the community and away from the main highway was well supported by the
residents afraid of the impact of regional traffic on the community. Yet the development
industry accused Disney of infringing one of the tenets of commercial practice, thus
making the project unsustainable without subsidies—an allegation that Disney has
strongly denied.

The most influential new town since Radburn, New Jersey (started in 1929),
Celebration is being built out as planned—the alternative model to traditional suburban
sprawl. However, its garden city-like density, its limited capacity for growth, and the
absence of a structuring (local and regional) transportation system preclude its being the
long-term solution to the challenge of smart growth in North America.

JEAN-FRANCOIS LEJEUNE
Disney Theme Parks; Duany and Plater-Zyberk (United States); New

Urbanism; Seaside, Florida; Stern, Robert A.M. (United States)

Further Reading
Dunlop, Beth, “From Fantasy to Traditional Planning,” 12, no. | (Fall 1998)
Frantz, Douglas, and Catherine Collins, New York: Holt, 1999
Hegemann, Werner, and Elbert Peets, New York: Architectural Book, 1922;
reprint, edited and introduced by Alan J.Plattus, New York: Princeton Architectural
Press, 1988
Kroloff, Reed, “Disney Builds a Town,” 86 (August 1997)
Ross, Andrew, New York: Ballantine Books, 1999; London: Verso, 2000

Stein, Karen, “Place Making: Celebration Place, Celebration, Florida,” 184, no. 1
(January 1996)
Stern, Robert A.M., and John Montague Massengale, “The Anglo-American Suburb,”
51 (October 1981)

CENTER FOR INTEGRATED SYSTEMS,
STANFORD UNIVERSITY

Designed by Antoine Predock, completed 1996 Palo Alto, California

The Center for Integrated Systems Extension Building (CISX, 1993-96) at Stanford
University is an academic research and educational facility designed by Antoine Predock
(1936-). The design is the result not only of a highly skilled architect’s efforts but also of
50 years of successful educational initiatives and over a decade of thoughtful university
planning.

Established in 1888, Stanford University undertook a Centennial Campaign funding
drive during President Kennedy’s term (1980-92) that resulted in raising $1.26 billion, at
the time the largest amount in the history of American higher education. This success was
due in large part to the university’s close ties with regional electronics and computer
industries of Silicon Valley that sparked much of the economic growth of the last decade
of the 20th century. Comciding with this success was the development and adoption of

in 1991, prepared by Hardy, Holzman, Pfieffer and the Office of the University
Architect. This study examined the original intentions behind the Olmsted-Stanford
Beaux-Arts campus plan, a century of sporadic growth, and the desire to promote natural
landscaping. As a plan for revitalization, it presented a two-pronged approach to restore
the original character of the institution and also to ensure that all future development
would reinforce as well as extend characteristics of the original plan, a natural landscape,
and the architectural environment in a cohesive manner. The most influential directives
concerning new individual projects sought to harmonize building massing and material
choices with the dominant Richardsonian Romanesque-Mission style of red clay roof
tiles, arcades, and massive rough-faced sandstone walls of the Main Quad.

During the following term of President Casper (1992-2000), much of the plan was
implemented. A good deal of Stanford’s original infrastructure was restored or renovated,
such as the Main Quad, dating from the original collaboration of 1887-1901 between
U.S. Senator Leland Stanford, Frederick Law Olmsted, and Charles Coolidge, of
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge. Conformance with this plan was held to, as a bold
initiative for growth was inaugurated that sought to ensure Stanford University’s place at
the forefront of academic/technological research as well as a place of significant
architectural interest. In addition to the CISX building, other notable projects have
included the William Gates Computer Sciences Building (1994-97) by Robert A.M.Stern
and Partners and the Science and Engineering Quad (1995-99) by Pei, Cobb, Freed and
Partners.

Stanford’s Educational Initiative brought about a windfall of resources and ultimately
the need for a campus revitalization strategy, all stemming from a partnership between
academia and industrial entrepreneurs concerning electronic and computing systems that
began in the early 1950s. The initiative was originally known as the Industrial Affiliates
of Stanford in Solid-State Electronics and was developed in collaboration with a graduate
program for members of the electronics industry known as the Honors Cooperative Plan.
These programs bound together the educational training, research agenda, and pragmatic
objectives of an emerging industry that contributed significantly to the development of


he computer industry and Silicon Valley. The plan served as a model that ultimately led
o a comprehensive program known as the Center for Integrated Systems (1983), which
ought to coordinate scientific research and industrial development in related engineering
isciplines at Stanford University. These developments culminated in the 1983 CISX
building.

By the early 1990s, the need arose to expand the original 70,000-square-foot CISX
building by Ehrlich-Rominger, Architects. A laboratory with additional support space of
semiindustrial character was needed for a variety of experimental efforts. The location of
the existing facility on campus was west of the Main Quad and presented an early
opportunity to test the adopted revitalization plan. Because of the sensitive location and
difficult technical requirements, a decision was made to host an invitation-only design
competition. Predock’s winning entry was distinct among the four competitors for
achieving several desirable goals for coherent expansion.

Predock’s solution comprised three parts: a new courtyard, the new addition, and a
new hazardous materials/mechanical equipment area, for a total of 53,000 square feet.
Rather than butting up against the existing building, Predock designed the addition as a
discrete building that spatially defines the Main Quad, presenting a powerful logic for a
building form that affords both an east entry visible from the Main Quad and a north
entry for easy access. His plan strengthened the nodal entry to the new Science and
Engineering Quad to the south and the Biological-Chemistry science area to the north,
created a private interior courtyard for informal gatherings, and defined interior
programmatic spaces.

The design suggests a traditional sense of solidity for which the Richardsonian
Romanesque-Mission style is noted. A concrete plinth provides a visual base for the
building, similar to the Main Quad. The building is faced with Indian (Delhi) fossilized
sandstone veneer. The sense of weight is enhanced through contrast with a copper-clad
concrete-vault form that floats within the CISX main entry arcade and that proportionally
matches the Main Quad entry arches. Copper-sheet roof shingles are returned to cover the
eave soffits, which, in conjunction with a continuous nine-inch strip window at the eave,
also cause the upper roof mass to hover. Together the copper-sheathed roof and vault
heighten the contrast and sense of gravity of the stone-faced building mass. The
stonework and copper materials complement a sense of permanence in the unusual
handling of mass and space that both delights and defies conventional sensibilities
established by the original campus buildings. Overall, the design offers a 21st-century
expression of a scientific endeavor that is genuine, rich, and appropriate in the context of
the traditional architectural style of the original campus.

t
t

St
a

RANDY SWANSON
Predock, Antoine (United States)

Further Reading

“Antoine Predock’s CIS Extension Is the Boldest New Building on Campus,”
(September—October 1996)
Baker, Geoffrey H., Chichester, West Sussex: Academy Editions, 1997
Chow, Phoebe, “Stanford Systems,” | (November 1997)

Collins, Brad, and Juliette Robbins (compilers), | New York: Rizzoli, 1994
Collins, Brad, and Elizabeth Zimmermann (editors), | New York: Rizzoli, 1998
“Completed Competition Projects Tell the Story,” 10, no. 1 (2000)

Hess, Alan, “Stanford Takes Welcome Turn toward the Abstract,” (3 May 1996)
Joncas, Richard, David J.Neuman, and Paul V.Turner, New York: Princeton
Architectural Press, 1999
Neuman, David J., “New Time-Saving Standards at Stanford University,” 4, no. 3
(1994)

Stephens, Suzanne, “The American Campus,” 188, no. 2 (2000)

Stein, Karen, “Two California Campuses: Two Different Worlds: Antoine Predock Spans
the Spectrum with a New Building for ” 8, no. 97 (1997)

Turner, Paul Venable, New York: Architectural History Foundation, and Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1984

CENTURY OF PROGRESS EXPOSITION

Chicago, Illinois, 1933-34

The Century of Progress International Exposition, held in Chicago in 1933-34, played
a pivotal yet often underrecognized role in the development and acceptance of modern
architecture. The event was the largest architectural program realized in the United States
during the depths of the Great Depression. It attracted the attention of influential
architects and designers as well as building materials manufacturers and design critics.
The innovative exhibition pavilions introduced more than 38 million fair visitors to then-
current progressive ideas in modern architecture. Millions more became acquainted with
the modern exposition designs through secondary sources, including a wide range of
articles, newsreels, and souvenirs.

In 1928 a not-for-profit corporation was chartered to organize a world’s fair to
celebrate the centennial anniversary of the founding of Chicago. The fair organizers
quickly realized that this theme was too narrow to attract enough international or even
national interest to guarantee a successful event. Additionally, the recent financial fiasco
of the Philadelphia Sesquicentennial International Exposition made it apparent that
relying on a structure and character common to past expositions would result in a
financial and cultural catastrophe. To ensure the success of the Chicago exposition, the
organizers knew that they had to broaden the scope of the fair and present an event that
would be perceived by critics and the public as appropriate to modern times.
Consequently, the organizers adopted a more inclusive, forward-looking theme: the
impact of scientific development on the betterment of humanity.

The members of the architectural commission for the exposition—Paul Philippe Cret,
Raymond Hood, John Holabird, Edward Bennett, Hurbert Burnham, Arthur Brown,
Harvey Wiley Corbett, and Ralph Walker—knew that their designs had to reflect the
modern theme of the fair. The struggle of these notable, Beaux-Arts-trained architects to
achieve this through coming to terms with recent developments in their field, as well as
the changing conditions of modern life, is clearly evident in the preliminary schemes for

the event. Early site plans consisted of neoclassical buildings laid out following a
symmetrical that emphasized a strong sense of axiality. The long and narrow exposition
site, financial limitations resulting from the Great Depression, the lack of a rigid building
code, and the ephemeral nature of the event all served as sources of inspiration and
limitation for the committee members in their efforts to create a modern world’s fair. The
final result was an asymmetrical layout of inexpensive yet innovative buildings of
prefabricated materials.

The fairgrounds covered three and a half miles of new manmade land along the shore
of Lake Michigan directly south of the Loop. Recently completed neoclassical buildings,
including the Field Museum of Natural History, the Shedd Aquarium, and Soldier Field,
framed the north end of the site. These historically derived buildings provided a
monochromatic backdrop, reminiscent of Chicago’s Columbian Exposition of 1893,
which con trasted sharply with the colorful, modern exhibition pavilions that covered the
fairgrounds.

Architects produced a wide range of building designs for the Century of Progress
Exposition. These included large exhibition halls, futuristic model houses, progressive
foreign pavilions, and historic and ethnic entertainment venues. Designs of the major
pavilions ranged from the “ultramodern” yellow and blue Administration Building
(Bennett, Burnham, and Holabird), with its silver, undulating entrance and factory
fenestration, to the flat, windowless, streamlined Sears Roebuck Building (Nimmons,
Carr, and Wright). Several of the main pavilions, including the Hall of Science (Cret),
which served as the centerpiece of the fair, and the Electrical Building (Hood), were
decorated with panels of bas-relief sculpture containing stylized, allegorical figures
representing the sciences. Many other buildings, however, including most of the
corporate pavilions, contained little or no applied ornament, except letters spelling out the
company’s name across their facades. Pavilions such as the Time and Fortune Building
(Nicolai and Faro) and the Havoline Thermometer Tower (Alfonso Iannelli and Charles
Pope) strove for more immediate corporate recognition by including giant reproductions
of their products or related items as part of their building’s design. Several other
companies commissioned pavilions constructed out of their own new products. For
example, the Owens-Illinois Glass Corporation Pavilion (Elroy Ruiz) con-sisted of a
tower and two wings built out of glass bricks. A comprehensive color scheme, created by
Joseph Urban, that articulated the individual exterior planes of the major buildings
through the use of vivid hues, unified the diverse fair pavilions. At night, the use of
dramatic lighting effects created a magnificent spectacle. The fair presented the largest
quantity of electric lighting emitted at a single event up to that time and featured the first
major application of neon in architectural lighting.

Millions of attendees stood in long lines to tour full-scale, modern houses on display
in the Home and Industrial Arts Exhibit. For many visitors, the Chicago fair provided
their first exposure to modern residential design. Most of the model houses were
sponsored by building-material manufacturers. They promoted new construction
materials, such as porcelain enamel panels or Rostone (a synthetic stone product), or
demonstrated new uses for traditional building materials, such as “precast” brick walls.
Other houses, including the Tropical House, focused less on materials and more on
demonstrating new ideas in modern living. The House of Tomorrow, designed by George
Frederick Keck, generated the greatest amount of attention. Keck designed his 12-sided


glass residence to appear as futuristic as possible in hopes of making the aesthetics of
modern architecture more familiar and thus more acceptable to the average American
home buyer.

Because of poor economic conditions around the world, only a few nations
constructed their own pavilions at the exposition. Most countries chose
instead to promote themselves through national displays located in the
general exhibition buildings. Notable exceptions included Sweden,
Czechoslovakia, and Italy, which built large, modern pavilions. The Italian
Pavilion (Mario De Renzi, Antonio Valent, and Adalberto Libera)
consisted of an assemblage of dynamic forms that clearly expressed the
major political goal of the displays inside: to increase support for Fascism
among the American public. The basic composition of the building
consisted of easily recognizable symbols of Italy’s recent

Century of Progress Exposition,
Chicago World’s Fair (1933)

© 1933, Chicago Worlds
Fair/Kaufmann Fabry, Official
Photographers, W2124/Library of
Congress

transportation achievements, including a thin, wing-shaped, horizontal canopy that
hovered above the central entrance, and current political ideology, highlighted by an 80-
foot-high steel-and-prismatic-glass tower in the shape of a

Not all buildings were aesthetically modern. Event organizers wished to celebrate
earlier cultural developments to provide a context from which visitors could measure
current and future advances. Architecturally, the past was represented by recreations of
historic structures, such as Chicago’s Fort Dearborn and the Maya Nunnery of Uxmal;
ethnic settings for entertainment, such as the Belgium Village and the Streets of Paris;
and a variety of other “midway” attractions. Although historical in formal characteristics,
these buildings were constructed using modern materials.

The fair designers relied heavily on the use of new building materials to minimize
construction costs. The exteriors of most of the pavilions consisted of wall panels
produced from a variety of factory-made materials, including asbestos cement wallboard,
precast gypsum board, plywood, metal siding, and laminated insulation board. In addition
to aesthetics and cost, the factors involved in selecting a particular prefabricated material
included strength and durability, weatherproofness, moisture resistance, relative
resistance to combustion, lightness of weight, ease of securing to framework, and

availability. A new type of Sheetrock, suitable for exterior use on temporary buildings,
was the favored wall surface material for the large exhibition pavilions.

Factory-made panels were ideally suited to two major concepts in building
construction gaining favor among progressive designers in the early 1930s: prefabrication
and disposable architecture. Architects designing buildings for the exposition explored
systematic construction techniques in their attempt to keep construction costs down to an
affordable level despite sharp increases in labor and material costs and a significant
decrease in available funds as a result of the poor economy. Workers assembled various
types of standardized wall panels to steel framing in modern assembly-line fashion.
Screwing or bolting the panels of the pavilions together provided for easy disassembly
and salvaging of the building parts after the close of the exposition. This led proponents
of “disposable architecture” to highlight the Chicago fair in American architectura.
journal discussions on the benefits of short-lived buildings.

The designers also looked toward new structural ideas for inspiration in the creation of
modern yet novel-looking pavilions. Two forms of thin membrane roofing highlighted
structural advances at the event. The first, used in the rotunda of the steel Travel and
Transport Building (Bennett, Burnham, and Holabird), was the first major catenary roof
constructed in the United States. The massive structure consisted of a drum with support
cables traveling from the roof upward to the tops of 12 tall columns and then downward
to anchors at the outer edge of a broader, lower level of the building. The Brook Hil
Dairy (Richard Phillipp and Anton Tedesko), built for the second fair season in 1934,
also demonstrated an advancement in roofing design. The building’s five contiguous
elliptical barrel vaults presented the first use of a multi-vaulted concrete-shell roof and
probably the first applications of the Zeiss-Dywidag process for reinforced thin-shell
vaulting in the United States. A third, less apparent structural development was an
innovative system of low-cost pile footings. This proved more suitable than spread
footings for the unstable conditions of the recently created land of the fairgrounds.

The exposition also provided an opportunity for designers to explore and promote
innovative architectural ideas through unbuilt designs for the event. Frank Lloyd Wright,
whose inability to work cooperatively with other architects kept him off the design
commission, clearly realized the importance of the event in the development of American
architecture. With encouragement from Lewis Mumford and other architectural critics, he
presented three schemes for the fair at a meeting of the American Union of Decorative
Artists and Craftsmen held in New York in February 1931. These conceptual designs
explored housing the entire exposition in a skyscraper, under a massive tent structure, and
on barges floating out on Lake Michigan. Industrial designer Norman Bel Geddes, who
briefly served as a design consultant to the architectural commission, also promoted
innovative ideas, including the concept of streamlining, through producing a series of
unrealized, experimental theater and restaurant pavilions. Many of these designs,
including a rotating aerial restaurant, were featured in his influential 1932 treatise .

In contrast to the first Chicago world’s fair, which helped usher in a massive wave of
neoclassical buildings throughout the United States, the Century of Progress Exposition
played a less discernible role in the development of modern American architecture
despite its tremendous public success. Although the exposition encouraged a greater
acceptance of nonhistorical forms, few architects looked to the fair as a source of
aesthetic inspiration for their modern building designs. Reasons for this ranged from the


vast difference in functional needs between the temporary exposition halls and more
permanent architecture to the drastic reduction in all construction starts in the 1930s. Also
influential were the strong reactions of architectural critics to Wright’s omission from the
commission and, later, to the formal qualities of designs produced for the event. Although
the direct aesthetic impact of the exposition on everyday architecture was limited, the
designs did influence the formal qualities of buildings with similar functional needs,
particularly the designs of later exposition pavilions. The Chicago fair’s most significant
contributions to the development of American architecture lay instead in the introduction
and promotion of innovative building products and processes adaptable to both
progressive and traditional designs.

LISA SCHRENK

Cret, Paul Philippe (United States); Hood, Raymond (United States);

Mumford, Lewis (United States); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

Few secondary sources exist on the 1933-34 Chicago Century of Progress Exposition.
However, numerous articles were published on the architecture of the fair in
contemporary architectural publications, including and. The exposition
published several guidebooks and picture books, as well as a magazine for fair visitors.
The most significant of several large archives on the exposition is the Century of Progress
collection at the University of Illinois at Chicago, which contains over 1,000 linear feet of
original records from the event. These include correspondence, plans, photographs, press
releases, and published materials covering all aspects of the fair. The Lenox Lohr archive,
also housed at the University of Illinois, contains additional materials from the
exposition. Photographs, articles, pamphlets, and some drawings from the event can be
found in various collections at the Chicago Historical Society. The University of Chicago
owns the John Crerar Collection, a large pamphlet archive from the exposition. The
Daniel Burnham, Jr., and Edward Bennett collections at the Ryerson and Burnham
Libraries in the Art Institute of Chicago contain diaries, drawings, photographs, and other
miscellaneous paper items relating to the architecture of the exposition.
Condit, Carl W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974
Doordan, Dennis P., “Exhibition Progress: Italy’s Contribution to the Century of Progress
Exposition,” in edited by John Zukowsky, Munich: Prestel, and Chicago: Art
Institute of Chicago, 1993
Findling, John E., Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994

Findling, John E., and Kimberly D.Pelle, editors, New York: Greenwood Press,
1990
Lohr, Lenox R., Chicago: Cuneo Press, 1952
Rydell, Robert W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993

Schrenk, Lisa D., “The Role of the 1933-34 Century of Progress International Exposition
in the Development and Promotion of Modern Architecture in the United States,” Ph.D.
diss., University of Texas at Austin, 1998

CHADIRJI, RIFAT 1926—

Architect, Iraq

The driving force behind Rifat Chadirji’s work has been his attempt to reconcile
contemporary social needs with new technology. His search for a regional modernism
found expression in cement-concrete buildings and in his plans for Baghdad.

In the Iraq of the 1950s, a flowering of the arts included intensive discussions among
architects, artists, writers, and intellectuals about the need for appropriate artistic
expressions, influenced by both European ideas and local traditions. The architects
Wilson and Mason, who practiced in Iraq in the 1940s and whose buildings interpreted
local architecture employing indigenous master masons, also shaped Chadirji’s ideas
about regionalism. This approach stagnated somewhat after World War II, when new
technologies that bypassed the contribution of the indigenous building industry were
introduced. Architects such as Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and Frank Lloyd Wright
visited Iraq in the 1960s, encouraging the local Iraqi architects to find their own
expression of modern architecture. As a consequence, Chadirji sought to achieve a
synthesis between traditional forms and materials and modern technology and building
types. He studied local environmental features such as courtyards, screen walls, and
natural ventilation. However, until the late 1960s his buildings were clearly functionalist
and were determined by structural considerations and modern materials, as evidenced in
his Monument to the Unknown Soldier (1959) and in his Tobacco Monopoly Offices and
Warehouse (1969), both in Baghdad.

Chadirji articulated his ideas concerning a modernism informed by tradition in his
written works, theories that can be seen in his villa for H.H.Hamood (1972), designed as
a dramatic series of parallel vaults. As Chadirji noted, it was not until the early 1970s that
he reached the view that the connection between form and structure was not inevitable.
This realization led the architect to increased freedom of construction and the plastic
possibilities of building form.

This sense of plasticity and a graphic approach to buildings characterize the facades of
his buildings, as demonstrated in his published portfolio of etchings and drawings for the
Federation of Industries and for the Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs. His
buildings are characterized in plan by parallel walls and in elevation by facades of solid
planes with indented openings, often with protruding tall, thin, arched windows and
curving corners. The concrete buildings were usually designed to be faced in brick or, in
other countries of the Middle East, in stone. Together with Mohamed Makiya, Chadirji’s
buildings influenced much of the architecture in the Arab Middle East in the 1970s and
early 1980s.

In his analysis of built form, Chadirji led the way in the Middle East to
reevaluate architecture’s role in culture and politics. The effects of his
contributions have been long lasting and include his vision of rapidly
changing architectural forms as mediators between social needs and
prevailing technology. The failure to come to terms with this, he

postulated, partly explained the collapse of architecture seen in Iraq after


1945. Second, Chadirji saw the relationship between local traditional
building and international modernism as one in which an “authentic
regionalism” based on an abstraction of tradition and modernity could
emerge. Third, in the 1960s, Chadirji was early to recognize the potential
importance of the computer to design and urban planning such that
computer technologies would enable the inhabitants of buildings and
neighborhoods to participate in the design process.

WE ig W

Black-and-white drawing, elevation
study for Tobacco Monopoly Offices
and Warehouse Complex (1969)

Photo by Rifat Chadirji © Aga Khan
Trust for Culture

Chadirji’s contribution to the urban built form of Baghdad has been remarkable, despite a
turbulent political relationship with the authorities. In the late 1970s he was forced to
abandon his practice when the Iraqi government imprisoned him. Surprisingly, in 1980
that same government appointed him counsellor to the mayor of Baghdad, with
responsibility for an ambitious scheme for urban rehabilitation and development. This
project was completed in 1983 for the international meeting of Non-Aligned Nations; it
included a master plan, a citywide landscaping scheme, infrastructure development,
urban conservation and urban design projects, housing, and commercial works. Proposals
for building codes, conservation law, and economic development projects were all in his
domain, and for two years he was one of the most powerful bureaucrats in the country.

Chadirji left Baghdad for the United States in late 1982 and subsequently completed
his most significant book, (1986), and continued his research in the interrelationships
among architectural theory and phenomena in physics and biology. The Chadirji
Research Center in the United Kingdom is a major source of information about Iraq and
includes an extensive archive of photographs from his father and his own detailed survey
of Arab peoples and their physical world.

HASAN-UDDIN KHAN

Biography

Born in Baghdad, Iraq, in December 1926. Studied at the Hammersmith School of Arts
and Crafts, London, 1946-52, earning a Diploma of Architecture. Founder and partner of
Iraq Consult (1952-72). Married Balquis Sharara 1954. Worked for government
organizations as director of buildings: Waqf (1954-57), Public Works, Department
Health and Education (1957-58), Ministry of Planning (1958-59), and Ministry of
Housing, Planning Department (1960-63). Returned to private practice from 1965 until
1980. Appointed counsellor to the mayor of Baghdad from 1980 to 1982. Arrived of the
United States (Harvard University), where he was a Loeb Fellow (1983), Visiting Scholar
at the Graduate School of Design (1984-86), Philosophy of Education Research Center
(1985-92), and Graduate

Black-and-white drawing, conceptual
sketch for Tobacco Monopoly Offices
and Warehouse Complex, 1969

Photo by Rifat Chadirji © Aga Khan
Trust for Culture

School of Education (1987-92). Appointed a Visiting Scholar at the Aga Khan Program
for Islamic Architecture at MIT (1986-92) and at the Bartlett School, University College
London (1989-94). Established the Chadirji Research Center, Kingston-upon-Thames, in
1990. Recipient of the Bronze Medal, Barcelona International Furniture Design (1964),
The Chairman’s Award, Aga Khan Award for Architecture (1986), and Honorary Fellow
of both the Royal Institute of British Architects (1982) and the American Institute of
Architects (1987). Subject of over a dozen exhibitions in the Middle East and Africa
between 1966 and 1975. “Modern Arab Architecture” exhibition at the Royal Institute of
British Architects in London, 1978. Retired from practice, 1982; continues to live and
work in England.

Selected Works

Works all in Baghdad, Iraq, unless otherwise noted
Wahab House, 1954
Munir Abbas Building, 1957
Monument to the Unknown Soldier, 1959
National Insurance Company Building, 1960
Waaf Office Building, North Gate, 1965
Iraqi Federation of Industries Administration Building, 1966
Iraqi Scientific Academy, 1968
Tobacco Monopoly Offices and Warehouse Complex, 1969
Kufa Cement Factory (with N. Fetto and P. Nay), 1969
Sheikh Khalefa Building, Bahrain, 1970
Qatar Cinema Complex, Doha, 1972
Villa Hamood, 1972
General Federation of Trade Unions Assembly Hall, 1973
Central Post Office, 1975
Cabinet Ministers’ Building, United Arab Emirates (UAE), 1976
Al Ain Public Library, UAE, 1977

Rifat Chadirji House, 1979

Selected Publications

London: privately published, 1985
London: privately published, 1985
Beirut: privately published, 1985
London: KPI, 1986
Kingston-upon-Thames: CRC, 1991

Further Reading

“Architect of Baghdad: Rifat Chadirji” in Surrey, England: Sutton, 1984

Bofill, Ricardo, and Charles Knevit, “The Architecture of Rifat Chadirji: An Appraisal,”
(Tokyo) (May 1985)
Khan, Hasan-Uddin, “Regional Modernism: Rifat Chadirji’s Portfolio of Etchings,”
(Singapore) 14 (October-December 1984)
Khan, Hasan-Uddin, Volume 5 of K.Frampton, Series Editor, Vienna: Springer,
2000
Kultermann, Udo, Cologne: DuMont Buchverlag, 1980
Kultermann, Udo, “Contemporary Arab Architecture: The Architects of Iraq,”
(Singapore) 6 (July-September 1982)
Kultermann, Udo, New York: McGraw Hill, 1999
“Middle Eastern Realities at RIBA,” in (London) 19 (January 1983)
Ali, M., “Rifat Chadirji,” (Milan) (December 1983) Serageldin, Ismail (editor),
“Chairman’s Award: Rifat Chadirji,” in London: Butterworth Architecture, 1989

CHANDIGARH, INDIA

Chandigarh is the modern, new state capital built by the government of India in the
immediate aftermath of its independence from 200 years of colonial rule. On 15 August
1947, India’s hard-won freedom was accompanied by a partition that established Pakistan
as a separate country. As a result, the Indian state of Punjab lost its historic capital,
Lahore, to Pakistan. Consequently, the search for a replacement capital for East Punjab
was high on the agenda of the fledgling Indian nation-state.

A burgeoning sense of national pride focused attention on the search for this new
capital, and the project took on great symbolic value as a demonstration of the new
government’s effectiveness, ideals, and abilities. Although the development of this new
capital was ostensibly a state project, the central government took an active role in the
endeavor, propelled by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru’s personal interest in it. Instead
of choosing an existing city, Nehru advocated the making of a new capital that would
express the ideals of the new nation-state, which was precipitously embracing modernism
as a catalyst for change.

This kind of ideological momentum propelled the project quickly to a developmental
stage. The new capital was intended to resettle not only the Punjabi government and
university but also thousands of refugees displaced in the political upheaval. The new city
was named Chandigarh after an existing village which had a temple dedicated to the
Hindu goddess Chandi. A site for the project had been chosen by 1948, but in 1949 it was
changed to its present location in an effort to reduce the number of people whom the
project would displace. Even so, 24 villages and 9000 residents were forced to give up
their land and relocate. They actively protested their displacement, but the project went
forward, driven by the optimism and determination of the central government.

Although industrialization and modernization were key to Nehru’s agenda, he did not
actually prescribe a modernist architectural language for Chandigarh. The architectural
vision for the city first took shape under A.L.Fletcher, the government of Punjab’s
“Officer on Special Duty” for the capital project. Of Indian descent, Fletcher was trained

as a civil service officer under the colonial administration, which functioned through
procedures sanctioned by the home government in London. In what could be considered a
postcolonial reflex reaction, Fletcher turned to contemporary official town-planning
practices of England to derive his vision for a modern Chandigarh.

In 1948, English town-planning practices were strongly influenced by the principles of
the Garden City movement and Ebenezer Howard’s 1898 book (republished as
in 1902). Howard’s fundamental goal was to invent new living environments that could
coexist with industry without suffering from the congestion and squalor that resulted
from industrial pollution and agglomeration of labor. By the 1930s, garden city principles
had influenced the construction of several experimental new English towns, including
Letchworth (1903) and Welwyn (1919), and Radburn, New Jersey (1929). Eventually, its
principles were adapted to develop the greater London plan of 1944 and the New Towns
Act of 1946, which was used to design a ring of new towns around London.

Fletcher recommended a vision for Chandigarh based on these ideas and proposed
sending officials to England to recruit appropriate town planners and architects for
Chandigarh. However, Nehru quickly vetoed this idea, saying, “There is too great a
tendency for our people to rush up to England and America for advice. The average
American or English town-planner will probably not know the social background of
India. He will therefore be inclined to plan something which might suit England or
America, but not so much India” (Kalia, 1987).

Instead, Nehru suggested Albert Mayer for the job. Mayer was an American town
planner who had been strongly influenced by Lewis Mumford and Clarence Stein and
who had been working on an innovative pilot project for rural development in the state of
Uttar Pradesh and the urban development plan of greater Bombay. Although his ideas
were quite close to those of the Garden City movement, he had made considerable effort
to ensure that there was effective citizen participation in the design process based on the
principle of what Mayer called “inner democratization.” Nehru, attracted by Mayer’s
modern ideals and innovative practice, maintained friendly relations with him.

Mayer accepted the commission and began work on Chandigarh early in 1950, along
with four (non-Indian) associates: Julian Whittlesey, Milton Glass, Clarence Stein, and
Matthew Nowicki (a Siberian trained in Warsaw who joined the work on Stein’s
recommendation). The idea was that this team of architects would direct and supervise
the work of a group of Indian architects who could continue the job after their departure.
This apprenticeship model was carried through the remainder of the project.

Mayer’s plan centered around the basic unit of a superblock that would serve the daily
needs of a community with amenities such as markets and schools. A larger, three-block
unit that he called the Urban Village was to house a theater, hospital, meeting hall, and
additional shopping facilities. The Urban Villages were organized in a gridlike pattern,
although the main streets in Mayer’s plan were allowed to follow the natural topography
and thus broke from the geometric rigidity of the grid.

With the institutional campuses of the government and Punjab University at the north,
the city plan widened out in a triangular shape toward the south. A large business district
was sited at the center of the city, and an industrial site was proposed at the southeast
corner of the plan. Mayer’s plan accounted for a future phase of southward expansion
that could bring the town’s projected population from 150,000 to 500,000. Architectural
designs, including sketches and standards for the capitol complex, the commercial


buildings (bazaars), and much of the housing, were taken on by Nowicki, who was
largely responsible for envisioning the details that would determine the quality of life in
Chandigarh. Nowicki’s hand is also evident in a proposed continuous park system that
linked the various parts of the city.

Following Nowicki’s tragic and unexpected death in a plane crash on 31 August 1950,
progress on the project was deterred by Mayer’s increasing communication difficulties
with the Indian bureaucracy. As a consequence, Punjabi state officials began a search for
a new architect that resulted in the selection of the professional with whom the project is
most often associated: Swiss-French modern architect Le Corbusier, who viewed
Chandigarh as the superlative opportunity to model his theories on town planning in a
manner more befitting his conception of the true potential and purpose of modern
civilization. Modern Western civilization, according to Le Corbusier, had lost contact
with the “essential joys” of life in its clamor for money. In India, with its rural and
primitivistic way of life, Le Corbusier saw the potential of a civilization that was still in
touch with these atavistic desires but had as yet to advance into modernity.

Le Corbusier’s enchantment with this “humane and profound civilization” only served
to reassure him of the veracity of his vision for a true modernism. There seemed to be a
vindication at hand, and Le Corbusier set to work at the task of upgrading India to what
he described “the second era of mechanization” (quoted in Sarin, 1982)

Le Corbusier redesigned the Mayer master plan; what had been named an Urban
Village in Mayer’s plan, Le Corbusier renamed a “sector.” Each sector featured a green
strip running north to south, bisected by a commercial road running east to west. Le
Corbusier’s plan comprised a smaller area than Mayer’s (5380 acres versus 6908 acres)
reorganized into a more rationalized, orthogonal order and rectangular shape. A light
industrial zone was planned at the eastern limit of the city, with an educational zone on
the western. Le Corbusier’s strategy for organizing the city in the modular mode
stemmed from his view of the city as a living organism. Well-defined cellular
organization predicted orderly growth, with the unencumbered flow of traffic acting as
vital circulation to link the city’s head (the government complex) to its heart (the central
commercial sector) and to its various extremities.

In the end, Le Corbusier was responsible only for the overall master plan of
Chandigarh and almost nothing of the city itself. He prepared the guidelines for the
commercial center, and in an adjoining sector he designed a museum and a school of art.
The majority of the buildings within the city (other than those developed privately) were
designed by Jeanneret, Fry, and Drew, with assistance from their Indian team. Housing
designs for sectors 22 and 23 were the first to be developed. As most of Chandigarh’s
original housing was intended for government employees, it was decided that the housing
costs would be determined by a set percentage of a government employee’s income.
Jeanneret, Fry, and Drew devised 13 (later 14) “types” of housing based on a spectrum of
incomes from employees earning less than Rs. 50 per month to the chief minister. Each
design was given a designation with a number (denoting the economic sector for which it
was envisioned) paired with a letter (indicating the architect who designed it), type 13J or
14M, for example. All the designs were visibly “modern,” exhibiting unornamented stark
geometries broken only by sunscreening devices, such as deep overhangs and recesses,
perforated screens, and open verandas. There was even a “frame-control” system devised
to regulate all the construction that was privately developed.

Chandigarh’s more adolescent years have been burdened by the onus of carrying out

the idealistic and formalistic vision on whic!

h the city was founded while dealing with the

massive housing and economic problems that are, in part, the legacy of this vision. It is

one of the ironies of history that Chandigar]
the center of a political divide. Punjab was

h, born of a partition, once again found itself
further partitioned in 1965, creating the new

state of Haryana. At that point, Chandigarh acquired the unique status of a centrally

administered “Union Territory’ while also
Haryana. This was accompanied by the

functioning as the capital of both Punjab and
redrawing and reduction of the municipal

boundary of the city and the location of Chandigarh right at the line of division.

This repartition resulted in the establishment and growth of “satellite” towns,
bordering Chandigarh but legally in Punjab and Haryana. Now, “greater Chandigarh,”
originally designed for a population of 800,000, is approaching the one million mark.
Although efforts are under way to increase the density of the city and to accommodate
the changes, the most glaring omission of the city’s “master plan” continues to be
neglected by its new development plans. There is still no comprehensive plan to integrate
the poorest dispossessed people, who form almost 20 percent of the city’s population and
cater to most of its service needs, into the urban fabric. They continue to live in illegal,
substandard slums along the edges of the city.

In its ideological purity, Chandigarh belongs to the roster of cities such as Canberra,
Brasilia, and Islamabad, pregnant with the brazen optimism of their time. Brought to life
and now aging, it is one of the rare events of our modern era that, in its unadulterated
realization, define a moment (in time, place, and theory) from which our distance offers a
critical view.

VIKRAMADITYA PRAKASH WITH AMY POTTER

Further Reading

Constant, Caroline, “From the Virgilian Dream to Chandigarh,”
(1987)
Curtis, William J.R., New York: Rizzoli, 1986
Curtis, William J.R., “L’Ancien dans le moderne,” Saint-Gobain, France: Electa
Manteur, 1985
Correa, Charles, “Chandigarh: The View from Benares,” in edited by H. Allen Brooks,
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1987
Doshi, Balkrishna V., Ahmedabad, India: Vastu Shilpa Foundation, 1993
Evenson, Norma, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966
Fry, Maxwell, “Le Corbusier at Chandigarh,” in edited by Russell Walden,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1977
Gordon, Chris and Kilian Kist, Chandigarh Forty Years after Le Corbusier,
Kalia, Ravi, Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1987
Krustrup, Mogens, Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag, 1991
Le Corbusier, edited by Willy Boesiger, translated by William B.Gleckman, Zurich:
Editions Girsberger, 1953

(London), no. 1079

(0.1990)

Le Corbusier, Boulogne: Editions de I’ Architecture D’aujourd’hui, 1955; as
translated by Peter de Francia and Anna Bostock, London: Faber and Faber, and
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1958
Le Corbusier, edited by Willy Boesiger, translated by William B.Gleckman, New
York: Wittenborn, 1957; 4th edition, Zurich: Les Editions d’Architecture, 1966
Le Corbusier, “The Master Plan,” 15 (December 1961)
Le Corbusier, edited by Willy Boesiger, Zurich: Editions de l’ Architecture, 1965; 2nd
edition, New York: Wittenborn, 1965
Le Corbusier, edited by Willy Boesiger, translated by Henry A.Frey, New York:
Praeger, 1970
Le Corbusier, 4 vols., New York: Architectural History Foundation, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, and London: Thames and Hudson 1981-82
Le Corbusier, New York and London: Garland, 1983
Moos, Stanislaus von, Frauenfeld, Germany: Huber, 1968; as Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1985
Nehru, Jawaharlal, “Mr. Nehru on Architecture,” 2/2, (April 1959)
Nilsson, Sten Ake, translated by Elisabeth Ardréasson, Lund, Sweden:
Studentlitteratur, 1973
Prakash, Aditya, Chandigarh: Chandigarh Administration, 1980

Prakash, Vikramaditya, Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2002
Prasad, Susand, “Le Corbusier in India,” 3/6 (September-October 1987)
Sarin, Madhu, London: Mansell Publishing, 1982

Serenyi, Peter, “Timeless but of Its Time: Le Corbusier’s Architecture in India,” in
edited by H.Allen Brooks, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1987

CHANNEL 4 HEADQUARTERS

Designed by Richard Rogers Partnership, completed 1994

London, England

London’s Channel 4 was founded in 1982 primarily to commission and air programs
and films that had been created elsewhere by independent producers and to directly
compete with large corporations, such as the BBC. By the late 1980s, the company
employed more than 500 people whose offices were dispersed among several buildings in
Bloomsbury. In 1990 the station decided to move to a single building that could handle
the large number of employees as well as the channel’s changing technological needs,
brought about by its shift to digital broadcasting. Richard Rogers Partnership, a London
firm, won the commission, and the resulting design, with its sense of openness and
references to modern media technology, fit the image of a company known for its
progressive, sometimes radical, programming.

The building is situated on a corner lot in Westminster, midway between the Houses
of Parliament and Victoria Station. Targeted for housing, the site became available when
the developer went bankrupt, and the borough of Westminster approved the use of the
site by Channel 4 as long as the scheme included a certain number of residential flats.

The competition brief also stipulated other requirements, such as 15,000 square meters of
flexible office space, conference rooms, viewing and editing rooms, an underground
parking garage, and a public garden.

The site plan consists of four rectangular blocks that surround a central
landscaped garden. The southern and eastern wings—designed by Lyons
Sleeman and Hoare, not Rogers—are the required residential blocks,
consisting of 100 apartments. Rogers’s input on the design of the flats was
ignored after this portion of the site was sold to a separate developer to
raise money for

Metal mesh screens cover the windows
of the Channel Four Headquarters
(1994), London, England, designed by
Richard Rogers Partnership

© Gillian Darley; Edifice/CORBIS

Channel 4, which occupies the northern and western wings. The L-shaped layout of these
two blocks, each four stories high and containing the offices, echoes the street-corner

location of the building. They are joined by a soaring concave, glass-enclosed foyer
containing the main entrance, accessible once one walks up a stepped ramp that leads
from the street through a paved piazza. A lightweight glass bridge, covered by a steel-
and-glass canopy, allows the visitor to peer down into the station’s underground quarters.
The basement space is a vestige of an earlier building whose construction had begun in
the 1970s but had never been completed. The entrance facade is flanked by a tall vertical
tower, topped by television antennae and containing the building’s utilities as well as the
elevators, whose movements are visible from the street.

On entering the curved reception area that links the two wings, one can see past it to a
glass-walled public restaurant, several steps down from the entranceway. The open
design—penetrated by red steel supports for the entrance canopy—allows the visitor
immediately to see all the way through to the central garden area that lies behind the
building. The steel cables and rods that support the curving glass entrance wall are
slender yet clearly visible in the central atrium of the building. The upper floor of the
concave portion of the building contains sliding-glass doors that lead from executive
offices to a terrace that offers views to the garden below and overlooks the surrounding
Westminster area.

Engineered by Ove Arup and Associates, the building is constructed on a concrete
frame with gray aluminum cladding. The Arup firm developed an innovative technique to
hang the curving glass wall from steel supports. The main structural elements are painted
the same red as the supports for the entrance canopy, and the exterior walls of the office
wings are almost fully glazed, serving two important purposes for the architect. First, it
ensures that the horizontal traffic patterns of the people inside the building are visible,
complementing the evident vertical movements of the lifts, both of which are meant to
expose and highlight the constant activity and energy of the building’s users. Second,
Rogers’s extensive use of glass walls in the Channel 4 Headquarters reveals his interest in
transparency—the glazed entrance wall, for example, functions as a screen through which
the visitor can see a series of windowed walls and glass blocks. The view is one of an
overlapping sequence of metal and glass that continues until the eye is led through the
final glazed wall of the ground-floor restaurant. Rogers intended the visitor to be drawn
toward the building by noting the dynamism of its moving elements (such as the
elevators) from afar and then visually to peel away each layer and each successive screen
by moving through the building. The use of materials that appear light allows for
complex, interpenetrating layers while still maximizing the views through and out of the
building. The visual lightness was also meant to reduce the effect of a large office
building’s being placed in an already dense area of the city.

The obvious precedent, both aesthetically and conceptually, for the Channel 4
Headquarters is Rogers’s formulation of a high-tech architecture as manifested in his
Pompidou Center in Paris (1977, designed with Renzo Piano) and the Lloyd’s Building
(1987), his only other work in central London. Although smaller than these earlier works,
the Channel 4 building reveals many of the same interests and concerns; the exposed
steelwork in all three structures, the exterior lifts in the two London buildings and the
Pompidou’s external escalators, and the flexibility of the interior spaces call to mind the
machine imagery and functionalist rhetoric of the early Modern movement. Rogers is part
of a continuum that includes early 20th-century celebrations of the machine age as well
as the futurist projects of the 1960s British collective, Archigram, whose interest in an


adaptable architecture is paralleled in Rogers’s work. The design for the Channel 4
Headquarters includes the possibility of reworking the interior space should the building
someday serve a new tenant while still ensuring that the overall design housing the
changeable aspects remains unchanged.

DEBORAH LEWITTES

Piano, Renzo (Italy); Pompidou Center, Paris; Rogers, Richard (England)

Further Reading

Burdett, Richard (editor), New York: Monacelli Press, 1996
“Channel 4 Headquarters,” 02 (1995)
Davey, Peter, “Channel Vision,” 1196/1174 (1994)
Davies, Colin, “Broadcast News: Channel 4 Headquarters,” 84/1 (1995)
Powell, Kenneth, London: Phaidon, 1994
Powell, Kenneth, “A Building Tuned to Its Users,” 201/14 (1995)
“Richard Rogers Channel 4 Television Headquarters,” 10/301 (1995)
“Richard Rogers Partnership: Channel 4 Television Headquarters,” 65/9-10 (1995)
Sudjic, Deyan, London: Fourth Estate and Wordsearch, 1994; New York: Abrams,
1995
Sudjic, Deyan, London: Blueprint Media, 1996

CHAPEL OF NOTRE-DAME-DU-HAUT

Designed by Le Corbusier, completed 1956

Ronchamp, France

Le Corbusier’s Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut (1956) stands on a hill overlooking the
village of Ronchamp, France, just miles from the Swiss border. A pilgrimage site since
the 13th century, the building now receives as many students of architecture as
worshipers of the Virgin Mary, to whom it is dedicated. Although it is now considered
one of the masterpieces of modern architecture and a landmark work in Le Corbusier’s
formidable oeuvre, the building’s peaceful hilltop setting belies a controversial history.

The courting of Le Corbusier (born Charles-Edouard Jeanneret in 1887) began in early
1950, when the task of rebuilding what remained of a war-wrecked chapel on Bourlémont
hill was designated to La Société Immobliére (development corporation) de Notre-Dame-
du-Haut. The corporation’s original intention was to restore what remained of the
existing chapel, which had been destroyed by German bombing in 1944. After reviewing
the costs of restoration, however, it became clear to members of the corporation that
complete reconstruction was a more sound decision. In need of an architect, the group
turned to the Commission d’Art Sacré, the body of the French Church that made such
recommendations, and specifically to two local members of the commission—Canon
Ledeur of Besancon (the commission’s secretary) and Frangois Mathey—for suggestions

on whom best to solicit for the new design. There was little doubt that they would
nominate Le Corbusier.

Skeptical about a project for the Catholic Church, Le Corbusier, who was raised a
Protestant, initially refused the offer to submit drawings for the chapel. Just a few months
earlier, his design for a subterranean basilica at Sainte-Baume had been rejected, and it
was no secret that the architect remained bitter about what he perceived as the Church’s
lack of vision. However, his interest was piqued on learning more about Ronchamp. The
hilltop had been home to a third-century B.C. pagan temple and a number of different
structures dating as far back as the l4th century A.D., when church records reveal
worshipers first flocking to the site. Informed of the sanctity of the spot, Le Corbusier
made his first visit to Ronchamp in June 1950. After many hours spent walking and
sketching the hillside, the concept of building on the significant site became more
appealing, and the architect began to reconsider.

It was undoubtedly the support and friendship of Ledeur, Mathey, and their colleague
clergyman Pierre Marie Alain Couturier that led Le Corbusier to accept the commission
and allowed him to carry out the controversial design. All three were leaders of a
movement that aimed to revive the French Church through the application of
contemporary art and architecture. Together, the trio offered Le Corbusier free rein, and,
not surprisingly, Le Corbusier found it impossible to refuse.

The commission left him with a singular opportunity to manifest his belief in the
integral relationship between architecture and nature and between nature and religious
experience. His career and reputation established, the decision to accept the job was also
in keeping with a resolution to take on only work with a personal resonance. The project
at Ronchamp satisfied the architect on all counts.

The construction of Notre-Dame-du-Haut began in 1953, after the Besancon
Commission d’Art Sacré approved a refined scheme for the building. The building was
constructed of walls of sprayed untreated concrete ( or ) and whitewashed with a coat of
plaster to leave a rough surface. In fact, the use of concrete was as much a pragmatic
decision as an aesthetic one: Le Corbusier recognized the difficulty of transporting bulky
materials up the hillside and the consequent fact that he would “have to put up with sand
and cement.”

The chapel’s sweeping, earthen-colored roof—composed ofa pair of
parallel six-centimeter concrete shells—contrasts in both color and texture

with the coarse, bright-white walls. Likened

Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut
(1956), Ronchamp, France, by Le
Corbusier

© Dan Delgado

to everything from a nun’s habit to a ship’s prow, the form of the roof was consciously
designed by the architect with a crab’s shell in mind. The load is not carried by the walls
themselves, as it appears to be, but by 16 pillars embedded in the north and south walls.
The building’s two principal facades orient toward the south and the east and are
separated by a pinched wall that swiftly rises as it moves toward the corner. The south
facade, with its gently sloping wall punctured by a series of openings for stained glass,
holds the chapel’s main entrance. Ranging in shape from small slots to deep recesses, the
windows reflect the depth of the wall and create a mosaic of light on the interior. Le
Corbusier’s determination to employ this design element is apparent in his earliest
conceptual sketches, but the final design became far more restrained. Adjacent to the
wall, a two-ton enameled steel door bears the abstracted image of a giant open hand, a
welcoming to those entering the chapel.

Although the architect claimed that the “requirements of religion have had little effect
on the design,” the eastern facade was specifically created to accommodate an outdoor
chapel for 10,000 worshipers, the focal point of the annual pilgrimage masses at the
hilltop.

The west facade, the only blind facade on the building, features a double-barrel gutter
that runs rainwater into a receiving pool at ground level (rain collection was part of the
program given to the architect by the parish). The rain pool contains three pyramids and a
cylinder, all in —a sculptural composition vaguely reminiscent of Le Corbusier’s roof
garden for the Marseilles Unite d’Habitation (1947-53). These geometric elements
provide textural and formal contrast to the gentle bulge of the outside wall of the chapel’s


confessional. The west facade curves around to the north, where a pair of towers are
separated by the visitors’ entrance.

On entering the chapel, light pierces through the south wall into the darkened space.
Punched through the wall’s thick membrane, clear windows offer a blurred view of the
landscape beyond, painted panes pay tribute to the Virgin Mary, and colored glass filters
light throughout the central space. Le Corbusier relieved the weight of the roof on the
interior by separating the south and east walls from the ceiling with a narrow strip of
light. The floor follows the natural slope of the hillside leading down toward the altar,
which is situated beneath the highest point in the chapel. Three interior side chapels offer
additional spaces for private services. All are placed in the bases of the chapel’s
periscope-like towers and benefit from the dramatically filtered light that pours down the
towers’ shafts.

Le Corbusier conceived of Ronchamp as a three-dimensional work of sculpture to be
viewed from all sides and intended visitors to follow what he described as a “promenade
architecturale” in order to capture a series of "événements plastiques” (plastic events)
when approaching the building and entering its spaces. Le Corbusier’s concept of
architectural procession was clearly influenced by the architecture of the ancient Greeks
and particularly by the staging of the Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis—the
prototypical sanctuary atop a hill and the architect’s interpretive model for Ronchamp.

Even before it opened, the building and the architect were mercilessly attacked by
critics, the Church, and the citizens of Ronchamp. The chapel was many things to its
critics: a highly irrational building, a step backward for the Modern movement, and a nod
to archaic technology dressed in modern appliqué. However, supporters saw it as an
example of plastic poetry modified by the architect’s rationalism, a logical progression in
the development of the modernist idiom, and a place of intense beauty and feeling—a
bold return to the architect’s spiritual roots.

EUGENIA BELL
Church; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Unite
d’Habitation, Marseilles

Further Reading

Gans, Deborah, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Architectural Press, and London:
Architectural Press, 1987; revised edition, New York: Princeton Architectural Press,
2000
Pauly, Daniele, (bilingual French-English edition), Basel and Boston: Birkhauser,
and Paris: Fondation le Le Corbusier, 1997

CHAREAU, PIERRE 1883-1950

Architect and designer, France

The work of Pierre Chareau is emblematic of the confluence of artistic and
technological developments of high-modern architecture and design in Paris in the 1920s
and 1930s. Endowed with talent, charisma, and good fortune, Chareau became an integral
part of a group of progressive artists, designers, and their bourgeois patrons on the Left
Bank. Although Chareau was an influential furniture designer, interior decorator, and
architect of the period, his legacy hinges on his one architectural masterwork, the Maison
de Verre (1932; House of Glass).

Pierre Paul Constant Chareau began his design career at age 16 as a tracing draftsman
for the Parisian office of a British furniture and interior design firm, Waring and Gillow.
During this professional apprenticeship, Chareau also attended the Ecole des Beaux-Arts
from 1900 to 1908. Although he never received a formal degree, he studied a wide
variety of artistic disciplines, including painting, music, and architecture, before focusing
on interior decoration. In 1904, Chareau married Dollie Dyte, a Londoner teaching
English in Paris. This union proved critical to Chareau because it was one of Dollie’s
students, Annie Bernheim, who later became Chareau’s most important patron.

At Waring and Gillow, Chareau rose to the rank of master draftsman before being
conscripted into the French army in 1914. Once he was discharged in 1918, he
established his own design firm in Paris. His first commission was to design the interiors
and furniture for the apartment of Dr. Jean Dalsace and his new wife, Annie Bernheim-
Dalsace, Dollie Chareau’s former student. The Dalsaces also introduced Chareau to their
circle of intellectual compatriots. As a result of his newfound connections, Chareau began
to exhibit his furniture and continued to do so through the 1930s. This early furniture
consisted of massive wood-framed pieces heavily influenced by the Art Deco style. By
1924 he started designing much lighter furniture using metal frames and surfaces. His
work stood at the threshold between the tradition of craft and a modern industrial
aesthetic.

By the mid-1920s, Chareau was well established within a group of designers referred
to in Paris as or architect/ decorators. This group consciously resisted the separate
categori-zation of architect, decorator, and furniture designer. Chareau went beyond
decorating surfaces by removing walls and traditional moldings of existing apartments to
embody new modernist ideals of spatial fluidity and the elimination of ornament. Within
the newly configured spaces, he would integrate fixed furniture pieces in conjunction
with freestanding furniture arrangements. The results were Cubist-inspired assemblages
of volume, surface, texture, and color. After a series of collaborative interior projects
done with designer Robert Mallet-Stevens and others, he received his first architectural
commission in 1926 for a clubhouse in Beauvallon, France, for Annie Dalsace’s uncle.

It is at the Maison de Verre, however, that Chareau most clearly asserts his modernist
vision. The Dalsaces commissioned Chareau in 1928 to design their home together with
the offices of Dr. Dalsace’s gynecological practice. Chareau embodied the avant-garde
spirit by using industrial materials for residential construction such as exposed steel
framing for the structure, translucent glass blocks for the enclosure, and Pirelli rubber tile
on the floor. In addition, Chareau captured the dynamism of modern life by designing a
kinetic architecture that could transform habitation of the space. For example, at the
bottom of the main staircase, perforated metal screens either prevented the doctor’s
daytime clients from ascending the stairs or swung out of the way to invite the evening
guests up to the great room on the second level. The large double-height space at the top


of the stairs became a center of Parisian intellectual activity: it doubled as a theater for
musical and literary performances while displaying the Dalsaces’s acquired treasures of
modern art.

In 1932 the Maison de Verre won Chareau wide recognition in the national and
international press: it was clear that he had created a unique, forward-looking
architecture. He was invited to join the editorial board of the new progressive
architectural journal a position that he maintained throughout the 1930s. Chareau’s
production and development as an architect, however, were significantly limited by the
worsening economic situation in Europe. To survive, he and his wife began to sell their
painting collection of modern masters, including Georges Braque, Giorgio de Chirico,
Paul Klee, Piet Mondrian, and Pablo Picasso. The only significant commissions that he
received in the period leading up to World War II were the renovation of the LTT
telephone company offices in 1932 and a weekend house outside Paris for his longtime
friend, dancer Djémil Anik, in 1937.

In 1940, Chareau left France for New York to avoid the ravages of war. During the
war, he kept busy by organizing exhibitions for the French Cultural Center. In 1947 his
last significant commission was a weekend house and studio for the artist Robert
Motherwell in East Hampton on Long Island. Here, Chareau adapted a military Quonset
hut for the building’s shell. A long bank of windows inserted along one edge of the large
metal barrel vault and an exposed metal frame supporting the upper level in the interior
were only a crude memory of the promise of an industrial aesthetic achieved in the
Maison de Verre just 15 years prior.

After his death in New York in 1950, Chareau remained a relatively peripheral figure
in 20th-century architecture because of his modest production of built works and the
paucity of a written record or philosophy. However, a renewed interest in Chareau’s work
was evident in the second half of the 20th century, beginning with Kenneth Frampton’s
1969 article on the Maison de Verre published in the journal Subsequently, Marc
Vellay, the grandson of Jean and Annie Dalsace, collaborated with Frampton on the first
comprehensive record of Chareau’s output in 1984. Symptomatic of Chareau’s marginal
status, however, is that Frampton, who has been credited with resurrecting Chareau’s
reputation, did not mention him in his sweeping study of 20th-century architecture,

published in 1980.
PETER H.WIEDERSPAHN

Biography

Born in Bordeaux, France, 3 August 1883; immigrated to the United States in October
1940. Married Dollie Dyte 1904. Studied painting, music, and architecture, Ecole des
Beaux-Arts, Paris 1900-08; apprentice in furniture design in the firm of Waring and
Gillow, Paris 1908-14. Served in the French Army during World War I. Established
private practice in Paris 1918; partners with Bernard Bijvoet 1925-35; a founder of the
Union des Artistes Modernes; moved to New York 1940; organized shows for the French
Cultural Center. Died in New York 1950.

Selected Works

Clubhouse (now altered), Beauvallon, 1928
Maison de Verre, Paris, 1932
LTT Telephone Company Renovation, Paris, 1932
Djémil Anik House, outside Paris, 1937

Robert Motherwell Studio (destroyed), East Hampton, New York, 1948

Selected Publication

“La Creation artistique et imitation commerciale,” —-11 (1935)

Further Reading

Baroni, Daniele, “Pierre Chareau, Protagonist of the Modern Movement,” 21/81 (June
1986)
Blake, Peter, “Chateau Chareau,” 65/6 (May 1994)

Chareau, Pierre, edited by Yukio Futagawa, Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1988
Filler, Martin, and Marc Vellay, “House of Glass, Walls of Light: A Beacon of
Modernism,” 155/2 (February 1983)

Frampton, Kenneth, “Maison de verre,” 12 (1969)

Futagawa, Yukio (editor), Tokyo: A.D.A. Edita, 1988

(exhib. cat.), Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1993
Taylor, Brian Brace, Cologne: Taschen, 1992
Vellay, Marc, and Kenneth Frampton, New York: Rizzoli, 1984; London: Thames
and Hudson, 1985

CHEN ZHI 1902-—

Architect, China

Chinese architect Chen Zhi was born in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, in southeastern
China. He had received a college edu-cation from Tsinghua School in Beijing before he
was sent to the United States in 1923 to study architecture. He completed his Master of
Architecture in 1928 at the University of Pennsylvania. During his student years, he won
the Cope Prize Architectural Competition in 1926. In the summer of 1928, he went to
New York to work for Ely J.Kahn for one year and then returned to China.

Chen joined the architecture faculty at Northeastern University in 1929. The school
was founded by another University of Pennsylvania graduate, Liang Sicheng, with whom
Chen also cooperated for design practice. Their projects included the campus buildings of

Jilin University, Changchun City, China. However, Chen did not stay long; in late 1930
he departed for Shanghai.

In Shanghai, Chen established his lifelong career in architecture. In 1933 he was a
partner of Huagai Architectural Office, a leading architectural firm in Shanghai for the
following two decades. Among their major projects are the office building for the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Nanjing, the Shanghai Grand Theater, and the Zhejiang
Xinye Bank in Shanghai. These designs have reflected the influence of the American
Beaux-Arts tradition that Chen and some of his partners studied and assimilated into their
own work while in the United States.

In 1952 Chen left private practice to take positions in government-supported design
institutions. He was one of the leading technical designers in Shanghai, where he was the
chief architect for the East China Architectural Design Company and the president and
chief architect of Shanghai Civil Building Design Institute.

Among the major projects that Chen designed or directed are the memorial tomb of Lu
Xun, the Shanghai International Seamen’s Club in Shanghai, and Friendship Hall in
Sudan. Chen also participated in the design of the Memorial Building of Chairman Mao.

Chen’s design philosophy emphasized nationalism in architecture. He believed that the
new designs in China should reflect traditional and national architectural features and
highlight the local characteristics in style. When he designed the Lu Xun Memorial
Museum in Shanghai, he treated the gable walls with three steps—a typical feature from
the vernacular architecture in Lu Xun’s hometown, Shaoxing.

However, Chen does not favor an architectural conservatism. When he designed a
commercial street in Minghang, he tried to express a new spirit with well-balanced
volumes that, in the language of modernism, marry form with functionalism.

YUNSHENG HUANG

Biography

Born in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China in 1902. Attended the Tsinghua School in
Beijing, and the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Taught at Northeastern
University and Zhijiang University in China. Chen’s architectural teaching in Shanghai
was affiliated with Zhijiang University, where he was department chairman, 1949-52.

Since 1952, Chen Zhi had been the chief architect at East China
Architectural Design Company until his retirement.

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS

Although Chicago architecture has, within modernist architectural
histories, been conflated with the “Chicago School,” a term borrowed
from literary criticism and applied to the distinctive residential work of
Louis Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright, and their contemporaries, Chicago
architecture is, in fact, more diverse and less insular than the modernist

narrative suggested (Condit, Giedion, Hitchcock). Chicago School
scholars’ views were popularized in publications suchas (1965), which
asserted that “almost the whole history of what we call ‘contemporary
design’ can be examined in Chicago. For Chicago is the birthplace of
modern architecture” (see Siegel, 1993). More recently, however, some
architectural historians have debunked the myth of the Chicago School

and shown that other locales simultaneously witnessed similar design
shifts.

Architectural historians have studied a range of types and styles, some typically
American, some more innovative. Chicago designers, mostly recent migrants and
immigrants, set many trends and standards in the 19th and 20th centuries. Several factors
influenced the city’s prominence on the national and international scene. Chicago, grid
platted in 1830 and incorporated in 1837, grew rapidly into a great metropolis in large
part because of its auspicious location. The city lies near the geographic center of the vast
and fertile plains region, blessed also with abundant natural resources. Its location at the
southwestern tip of the Great Lakes system and near the Mississippi River allowed
Chicago to develop during the 19th century into a center of trade, finance, industry, and
rail and water transport, second only to New York City. From the beginning this urban
center attracted entrepreneurs. Their wealth and cultural aspirations supported skilled
professionals and artists in many fields, including architecture. In many respects, the
speculative fever of the 1830s persisted through the end of the millennium. Generous
patronage for significant architectural works abounded, although only at the end of the
century did preservationist ideals take root. Surviving works of special merit are
embedded in the more common fabric of Chicago’s built environment, which stretches
from the downtown Loop, where the Chicago River meets Lake Michigan, across the flat
prairie through an ever-expanding fan of suburbs.

In Chicago’s Loop dozens of tall, speculative office buildings were constructed from
1880 through 1929 as investors sought to accommodate large and small businesses. The
Marquette Building (1895), developed by the Brooks brothers and designed by Holabird
and Roche, established a characteristic formula. This 16-story steel-framed structure has
a U-shaped plan and cladding of dark brick and terra-cotta. The flat classicizing ornament
is articulated into a base, shaft, and capital, thus giving the enormous block a sense of
order within the gridded streetscape. The Conway Building (1915), by Graham,
Anderson, Probst and White, is organized around a square light court, like many of
Chicago’s multitenant office buildings. Cream-colored terra-cotta ornament of classical
character forms the tripartite schema of the exterior cladding. This structure, developed
by the estate of merchant Marshall Field, became the model for premier commercial
structures throughout the country during the 1920s. The fact that it resembles the earlier
Marshall Field and Co. State Street Store (1902-14), by D.H.Burnham and Company,
illustrates how these large Chicago design firms estab-lished the nation’s business
vernacular in the first decades of the 20th century. More distinctive are the pre-
Depression-era corporate headquarters, such as the Wrigley Building (1924, Graham,
Anderson, Probst and White) and the Gothic Revival Tribune Building (1925) by New
Yorkers Howells and Hood. Another 1920s newspaper headquarters, the Chicago Daily
News Building (1929, Holabird and Root), was more innovative as the first Chicago


building to utilize air rights over railroad tracks. It was designed in the moderne-style
stepped-back skyscraper type introduced in 1922 by Eliel Saarinen’s second-place
Tribune Tower scheme and replicated throughout the city and the nation.

Chicago’s suburbs host significant structures from every decade of the century. Lake
Forest, along the west shore of Lake Michigan, has possibly the nation’s first automobile-
oriented shopping center, Market Square (1917), designed by Howard Van Doren Shaw
as a picturesque amalgam of European and American motifs. Oak Park, west of
downtown, was home to Frank Lloyd Wright; he worked there and in Chicago from 1887
to 1910. Wright’s suburban prairie house type, formulated around 1901, expressed a
sense of shelter without emulating any historic model. His house (1903) for
manufacturing company president Ward Willits in Highland Park extends in four
directions on a cross-axial plan, anchored at the center by a fireplace core.

For those who wanted high-rise living without sacrificing domesticity or conventional
imagery, Chicago architects designed many elegantly detailed apartment buildings. Some
of Chicago’s richest men commissioned their friend Andrew Rebori to design for them
the 18-story luxury cooperative at 2430 North Lake Shore (1926), just one of many such
structures overlooking lakefront parks on the north and south sides of the city.

These parks form part of an extensive public works program undertaken in Chicago
following the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893. Civic designs were guided by the
1909 Plan of Chicago, sponsored by the Commercial Club. This ambitious document
epitomized the City Beautiful movement in its depiction of an orderly and monumental
urban region. Among the improvements that accorded with the plan were the south-side
neighborhood parks and field houses (1903-11, Olmsted Bros. and Burnham and Co.);
the bascule bridges across the Chicago River, notably Michigan Avenue Bridge (1920,
Thomas G. Pihlfeldt, Hugh E.Young, and Edward H.Bennett); and several museums,
including the Field Museum (1919) and Shedd Aquarium (1930), both by Graham,
Anderson, Probst and White. All these structures are neoclassical in style. Private
patronage also produced magnificent public buildings, for example, the Gothic Revival-
style campus of the University of Chicago, which includes the Rockefeller Memorial
Chapel (1928, Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue).

The Great Depression slowed Chicago building for over a decade. During 1932 the
value of new construction shrank to | percent of the 1926 total. Nevertheless, some
projects kept designers and builders at work. The 1933 Century of Progress Exposition
was supported by magnates such as Julius Rosenwald of Sears, Roebuck and Company,
Philip Wrigley, and Robert McCormick of the It played a major part in the acceptance
of modern architecture in Chicago during the next decades. Non-Chicagoans led the
design team: Raymond Hood, Paul Philippe Cret, Ralph T.Walker, Harvey Wiley
Corbett, and Arthur Brown, Jr. Chicago architects who participated were Edward H.
Bennett, John A.Holabird, and Hubert Burnham. Louis Skidmore was selected to direct
exhibition design, and he appointed his brother-in-law, Nathaniel Owings, to oversee
concessions. They would later form Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (SOM), a design firm
that profoundly shaped the Chicago skyline. The theme of the fair was “Science Finds—
Industry Applies—Man Conforms.” The official guidebook emphasized practicality,
efficiency, and economy through the use of prefabricated and mass-produced materials.
Its rhetoric resembled that in the 1932 New York Museum of Modern Art Modern
International Style exhibition catalog. Less aesthetically precocious were the New Deal


public works that saved Chicago’s economy. Projects included the expansion of Lincoln
Park, North Lake Shore Drive, public transit improvements, and large public housing
projects: the Jane Addams Houses (1938), Trumbull Park Homes (1938), and Frances
Cabrini Homes (1942 and later).

Rich and poor Chicagoans live in high-rise apartment buildings. Shortly after World
War II several innovative large-scale projects were constructed on the “Gold Coast” north
of downtown. Wealthy entrepreneurs, such as Herbert Greenwald and the McCormicks,
financed these towers and commissioned modernist architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.
His Promontory Point apartment complex (1949) used a reinforeed-concrete frame. In
collaboration with others, he designed two identical apartment towers (1949-52) at 860-
880 North Lake Shore Drive. Mies employed a distinctive vocabulary of form: a clearly
articulated structural grid based on an abstract mathematical order and filled by glass
walls. Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s Miesian Lake Meadows Apartments (1950-60)
makes up one of the city’s largest postwar redevelopment projects. It was intended by the
New York Life Insurance Company to provide racially integrated housing for middle-
and upper-income families and included a shopping center, community club, and office
building. The luxurious Lake Point Tower (1965-68), designed by George C.Schipporeit
and John C.Heinrich (both Mies protégés), used an undulating three-lobed design
inspired by a 1919 Mies project.

Mies’ Modern style, the basis of the second Chicago School, was employed for many
institutional and commercial projects. His structurally expressive Illinois Institute of
Technology Campus (1939-58) was based on a 24-foot module: the bay span of steel and
concrete frames. Mies designed Chicago’s Federal Center (1964, 1975), a grouping of
three buildings (a 30-story courthouse and office building, a 45-story office tower, and a
singlestory post office) oriented around a central plaza. In 1965 the combined firms of
C.F.Murphy Associates; Loebl, Schlossman and Bennett; and Skidmore, Owings and
Merrill employed a Miesian vocabulary for the Civic Center (now the Richard J. Daley
Center). Skidmore, Owings and Merrill designed a host of office buildings in the Miesian
spirit, including the Inland Steel Building (1955-57). Its stainless-steel utility tower
contains service elements, allowing rental spaces in the adjoining blue-green glass tower
to be free of structural obstructions. The 19-story building was one of the first tall
buildings erected downtown after the Depression. This firm explored capabilities of
materials and structural systems to the fullest extent in multiuse projects, such as the John
Hancock Center (1965-70) and the Sears Tower (1974). The former building uses an
exterior bracing system to attain a height of 1,107 feet, whereas the latter has a unique
structural system of bundled tubes and rises to 1,454 feet. Its black aluminum-sheathed
steel frame was the tallest building in the world at the time of construction.

Other architects of the postwar period employed more expressive or symbolic forms.
The Crow Island School in suburban Winnetka, by Finnish immigrant architects Eliel and
Eero Saarinen with Perkins, Wheeler and Will (1939-40), is a low, brickclad structure.
The picturesque massing resulted from the articulation of functional units. This was one
of the first schools in the country to respond to the principles of progressive education.
Bertrand Goldberg’s Marina City (1963) was realized as two circular, 60-story concrete-
frame towers. Loads are carried mainly by cylindrical cores. Forty floors of apartments
rise above an 18-story parking garage and two-story utility space. Chicagoan Walter
Netsch, a designer in the Skidmore, Owings and Merrill office, applied his “field theory”


of design at the University of Illinois Chicago Circle Campus (1965-77). Netsch
developed a generative principle of design based on rotated squares, resulting in elaborate
and complex interpenetrations of space. Harry Weese’s sculptural Seventeenth Church of
Christ, Scientist (1968) was inspired by the designs of his friend Eero Saarinen. Its
semicircular remforced-concrete form is sheathed in travertine and capped with a lead-
coated roof. Weese’s Metropolitan Correctional Center (1975), a federal prison
downtown, is an exposed reinforced-concrete building with a triangular footprint and
abstractly ordered slit windows illuminating perimeter cells.

The firm of Naess and Murphy (later C.F.Murphy Associates and Murphy/Jahn)
proposed a “new synthesis” of modern and historic elements. Their Prudential Building
(1955) was inspired by architectural forms of the 1920s. At O’Hare International Airport,
opened in 1963, their earliest Mies-inspired terminals were augmented in 1987 by
Munich-born Helmut Jahn’s United Airlines Terminal, whose forms recall railroad sheds.
Among the firm’s other projects are the Chicago Board of Trade addition (1981),
complementing the original 1930 Art Deco design of Holabird and Root, and the
controversial State of Illinois Center (1981-84), with its curvilinear glass exterior,
terminating in a truncated ellipse, and a 17-story atrium. In the 1980s responses to
specific sites and programs led to other signature designs in downtown Chicago. For
example, New Yorkers Kohn Pedersen Fox designed the 333 West Wacker Building
(1983) with a curved face, defining the bend of the Chicago River. Its green reflective
glass facade rises 36 stories. The same firm designed the 311 South Wacker Building
(1990), the world’s tallest concrete-frame building. Hammond, Beeby and Babka
employed a combination of forms drawn from Beaux-Arts classicism and 1880s
commercial buildings in their 1988 competition entry for the Harold Washington Library
Center, the country’s largest public library building. It is located in the south Loop and
was completed in 1991. In contrast, the firm of Tigerman, McCurry used a Gothic
vocabulary to articulate the exterior of their Chicago Bar Association Building (1990).

Among historical restoration projects since the 1960s are some of Chicago’s most
beloved monuments: the Auditorium Building (1889, Adler and Sullivan, restored 1967
by Harry Weese), Orchestra Hall (1905, D.H.Burnham and Company, renovated 1967 by
Harry Weese), the Art Institute (1893-1916, Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, lobby restored
1987 by John Vinci), and Navy Pier (1916, Charles Sumner Frost, ballroom restored
1976 by city architect Jerome Butler). Since 1991 VOA Associates of Chicago have
worked with public officials to turn Navy Pier into a multifunctional festival
environment, containing diverse public, cultural, entertainment, and commercial
facilities. Navy Pier differs significantly from earlier modernist single-purpose
commercial projects, such as Old Orchard Shopping Center (1957, Loebl, Schlossman
and Bennett) in Skokie. The Navy Pier project typifies Postmodern urbanism in the
United States.

JOAN DRAPER AND ROBERT NAUMAN
Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); Century of Progress Exposition,
Chicago (1933); Chicago School; Giedion, Sigfried (Switzerland);
Goodhue, Bertram Grosvenor (United States); Graham, Anderson, Probst
and White (United States); Hitchcock, Henry-Russell (United States);
Holabird, William, and John Wellborn Root (United States); Illinois

Institute of Technology, Chicago; Jahn, Helmut (United States); Kohn
Pederson Fox (United States); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany);
Office Building; Plan of Chicago; Sears Tower, Chicago; Skidmore,
Owings and Merrill (United States); Skyscraper; Sullivan, Louis (United
States); Tribune Tower International Competition (1922), Chicago;
Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

Bluestone, Daniel M., | New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1991
Chicago: Art Institute of Chicago, and New York: Rizzoli, 1982

Condit, Carl W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973
Condit, Carl W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974
Mayer, Harold M., and Richard C.Wade, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969
Siegel, Arthur (editor), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965; 4th
edition, revised and enlarged, edited by Franz Schulze and Kevin Harrington, 1993
Stamper, John W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991
Willis, Carol, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1995
Zukowsky, John (editor), (exhib. cat.), Munich: Prestel Verlag, and Chicago: Art
Institute of Chicago, 1987
Zukowsky, John (editor), (exhib. cat.), Munich: Prestel Verlag, and Chicago:

Art Institute of Chicago, 1993

CHICAGO SCHOOL

Named for the city in which it materialized and flourished, the Chicago School of
skyscraper design marked the emergence of the first truly American style of architecture.
A concern for the economic use of materials in a speculative environment resulted in a
radically new solution for the high-rise building, quite removed from the historicism and
eclecticism of the past. Beginning in the mid-1870s and peaking in the early 1900s, the
skyline of Chicago underwent an amazing transformation, evoking the “Brown City”
designation made so famous in the critical work by Lewis Mumford. The so-called death
of the Chicago School style in 1922 resulted in part from the ever-increasing popularity
of the White City and coincided with the Chicago Tribune Tower Competition. Yet, with
the 1938 arrival of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe at the Armour Institute of Technology
(later renamed Illinois Institute of Technology), a so-called Second Chicago School of
architecture emerged. This synthesis of late 19th-century structural efficiency and mid-
20th-century materials demonstrated the long-ranging contributions of Chicago School
architects, such as Louis Sullivan, on skyscraper design and modern architecture as a
whole.

In 1871 the Great Fire decimated the central business district in Chicago, destroying
18,000 buildings and causing over $200 million in property damage. An area four miles
long and nearly three-quarters of a mile wide was affected. Yet from this devastating loss,
Chicago arose like a phoenix, reborn from the ashes, as speculators funded an enormous
amount of commercial highrise building. Their desire for economical and functional
buildings contributed nearly as much to the aesthetic of the Chicago School as did the
architects who flooded there seeking to define the skyscraper. The primary characteristics
of the late 19th-century Chicago School included the economic use of and
experimentation with modern materials, resulting in little applied ornamentation and a
greater use of large glass windows.

As is the case in many urban centers, tremendous land costs made it desirable to build
tall and to build in a very concentrated area. Architects responded to the challenges
presented by speculators. In order to reap the greatest profit from their investment,
investors required maximum profitability from the interior space, so high-rent offices
with windows providing adequate natural lighting were preferred. The Chicago window
was developed and was repeated across the wall surfaces: a large central pane flanked on
either side by narrow, movable sash windows. In addition, as dictated by the building
plots and in the desire for greater interior light, Chicago School skyscrapers tended to be
either tall and narrow or to possess a U-shaped light court. Steel-cage construction
provided far greater fire protection than wrought- or cast-iron framing, a concern in a city
that had so recently suffered a catastrophic fire. The uniformity of the steelframe grid
improved construction time and aided in the ease of erection, yet the sodden soil
demanded the use of caisson foundations and limited the heights to which architects
could build. Masonry or terra-cotta encased the steel frame not only to express it clearly
but also to provide fireproofing. With restrictive budgets, speculators, such as the Brooks
brothers of Boston, also frowned on excessive and expensive ornamentation.

Most discussions of the Chicago School have emphasized the lack of exterior
ornamentation and have focused on the aesthetics of form. This is not entirely the case, as
recent scholars such as Bruegmann and Willis have argued. Speculators were willing to
pay for some degree of ornamentation if it appealed to prospective renters. Thus,
embellishments commonly appeared in lobbies or in courtyards, anywhere easily visible.
However, the overt large-scale application of historicism did not seem appropriate,
considering the use of modern technology. Thus, the bare-bones structural form of the
steel-framed building became primarily its own ornament, along with its curtain walls
filled with glass.

The most prominent Chicago School firms were Daniel Burnham and John Wellborn
Root, William Holabird and Martin Roche, and Dankmar Adler and Louis Sullivan.
These firms designed and built some of the best-known examples of Chicago School
architecture, mostly in Chicago, although some of Sullivan’s best work was in other
cities. The influential figure that drew most of these men together was the structural
pioneer William Le Baron Jenney, whose Home Insurance Building (1884-85)
masterfully handled a steel rather than an iron frame for the first time. Burnham,
Holabird, Roche, and Sullivan had worked in the office of Jenney during the 1870s. The
important aesthetic influence on these men was Henry Hobson Richardson’s tour de
force, the Marshall Field Wholesale Store (1885-87) in Chicago. The strong simplicity
and rationalization of form displayed by Richardson’s structure galvanized similar


approaches by Burnham and Root in their masonry-block Monadnock Building (1884—
91, with its steel-cage addition, 1891-93), Holabird and Roche’s Tacoma Building
(1887-89), and Adler and Sullivan’s Auditorium Building (1886-90).

Louis Sullivan in particular served as a strong proponent of the Chicago School style
not only through his buildings but also through his theoretical writings. In his “The Tall
Office Building Artistically Considered” (1896), Sullivan argued that the uniform
solution for high-rise form lies in organicism, “that the life is recognizable in its
expression, that form ever follows function.” Thus, the natural verticality of the
skyscraper, drawn by the steel-frame elements, should be articulated, and a clear
distinction should be made between the base of the building, its honeycombed office
middle, and its machinery top. In reality, Sullivan exploited mainly the vertical | beams,
although the horizontal elements also maintained the grid, and at times he simply added
decorative vertical elements that did not correspond to loadbearing members. He also
continued to employ ornament on his facades, mostly terra-cotta Art Nouveau-like
germinating seeds and leafy plants. Many European architects, such as the Adolf Loos,
eschewed such details and rejected ornamentation as “degenerate,” like the tattoos worn
by criminals. However, his practical approach to handling the skyscraper also inspired
European architects, such as the Dutchman Hendrick Petrus Berlage, who visited
Chicago in 1911. In addition, Frank Lloyd Wright transmitted Louis Sullivan’s ideas of
organicism, not only in ornamentation but also in terms of form, to Europeans through his
writings and work, as seen in his 1910 Wasmuth Portfolio. These important European
connections, particularly through the Dutch rationalists and the German Werkbund,
contributed to the spread of Chicago School ideals and helped facilitate the second
Chicago School by expatriates displaced by World War II.

In the first decade of the 20th century, the Chicago School reached its zenith, especially
in such works as Holabird and Roche and Louis Sullivan’s Gage Group (1899-1900) and
Sullivan’s Carson Pirie Scott store (1898-99, 1902-04). The empha- sis on modular
design, with large amounts of glass surface and still somewhat historicist masonry,
dominated the Chicago skyline and crept into other midwestern cities, such as St. Louis,
Detroit, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh. Yet the aesthetic changed, as American architects just
could not quite make a total commitment to modernism and reverted to a Beaux-Arts-
inspired classicism that affected form, ornamentation, and materials. The event that
spurred on this architectural reversal was the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893,
coordinated by Daniel Burnham. Burnham’s firm, D.H.Burnham and Company, and its
successor firm, Graham, Anderson, Probst and White, came to dominate major high-rise
design in the period leading up to the Great Depression in the style known as commercial,
or BeauxArts, classicism. Replacing the characteristic flat roof was a more ornamental
top, and the emphasis on heavy masonry over glass returned. New zoning laws in
Chicago as well as other cities encouraged the setback style over the tall narrow or even
U-shaped Chicago School type.

860-880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments
(1948-5 1), designed by Ludwig Mies
van der Rohe, Chicago

© Johnson Architectural
Images/GreatBuildings.com

The 1922 Chicago Tribune Tower Competition substantiated the comeback of
historicism in skyscraper design as Raymond Hood’s winning Gothic-inspired creation
beat out Eliel Saarinen’s modernist design in the most important international
architectural competition of the early 20th century. Instead of being a showcase for the
Chicago School style, the competition ended up displaying the new conservatism of
American design and hinting at the future ascendancy of European modernism.
Interestingly, European entries, such as Walter Groptus and Adolf Meyer’s, demonstrated
a far greater appreciation for the Chicago School aesthetic than did those of native-born
architects by referencing motifs such as the Chicago window. These Europeans had
virtually no experience (except on paper) in designing commercial high-rise buildings, a
primarily American phenomenon up until the post-World War II era. Thus, they were far
more willing to embrace technological developments and imaginatively pursue new
aesthetic solutions.

The German architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe had demonstrated a substantial
understanding of the Chicago School style in his Friedrichstrasse Office Building Project
(1921) in Berlin with its honeycomb repetition of offices and lack of ornamentation. His
early, unexecuted designs for office buildings possessed a rather organic sculptural
quality, with undulating curves rather than straight lines, but he quickly moved away
from this. By the time he arrived in Chicago to teach at the Armour Institute in 1938, he
had begun to synthesize his ideas of material integrity and structural honesty with the

tenets of the Chicago School. What he rejected was the use of heavy masonry or terra-
cotta cladding over the steel cage. For him, the pure expression of materials meant
exposing the frame and making it flush with the glass curtain wall, as visible in his Lake
Shore Drive Apartments (1948-51) in Chicago. His masterpiece Seagram Building
(1954-58) in New York, done with Philip Johnson, reveals the refinements that Mies
made to the Chicago School style. He tempered the “proud, soaring” structure by
emphasizing the monotonous horizontal banding of windows wrapping around the entire
building. The steel grid dominates, creating a precise exercise in modulation heavily
influenced by classical rhythms and order.
Coincidentally (or perhaps not), at the same time that Mies was reevaluating the
Chicago School style, architectural historian Carl Condit published his landmark study
(1952), which appraised the original Chicago School. With subsequent revisions and
expansions by the author, now retitled Condit’s remains the best work on this
commercial style.
The so-called Second Chicago School, centered in Chicago and led by Mies until his
death in 1969, emphasized bold structural form and expressive use of modern materials.
The skeletal quality inherent in steel-cage construction was worshiped, not hidden behind
masonry. Often International Style elements, such as or ribbon windows, merged with
the Miesian glass block, creating a hybrid of modernism unique to American cities and
American-based firms. The early work of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill adheres to these
tenets, as visible in their early masterpieces the Lever House (1952) in New York and the
Inland Steel Building (1954-58) in Chicago. Here, the glass box revealed the ful
maturation of the first Chicago School in the economic use of materials and modernist
aesthetics that reject all historicism and ornamentation.
Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s John Hancock Tower (1970) in Chicago, with its
exoskeletal cross bracing and clearly vertical articulation of structural members, signaled
the ending of the Miesian manifestation of the Chicago School style. Postmodernism thus
emerged, reconnecting with pre-Chicago School historicism. Yet, even in this form, a
demonstration of the Chicago School heritage continued to manifest itself in either overt
or subtle ways. Often these were found in Chicago-trained or Chicago-based architects,
suggesting a form of architectural osmosis occurring. A prime example is Helmut Jahn,
whose Xerox Center (1977-80) in Chicago appears very much like a stripped-down
version of Sullivan’s Carson Pirie Scott store. In a contextual way, Postmodern structures
in Chicago and elsewhere have attempted to visually embrace the older Chicago
Schoolstyle structures through the use of reflective plate glass and complementary height
lines.

VALERIE §.GRASH

Berlage, Hendrik Petrus (Netherlands); Burnham, Daniel H. (United
States); Carson Pirie Scott Store, Chicago; Graham, Anderson, Probst and
White (United States); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Holabird, William,
and Martin Roche (United States); Hood, Raymond (United States);
International Style; Lever House, New York; Loos, Adolf (Austria); Mies
van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Seagram Building, New York;
Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United States); Skyscraper; Sullivan,

Louis (United States); Tribune Tower International Competition (1922),
Chicago

Further Reading

The best-known and most oft-quoted source on the Chicago School is Condit. For
varying degrees of discussion on the manifestation of the Chicago School in the 20th
century, see Bluestone, Goldberger, Huxtable, Pierson, Van Leewen, and Willis. The
latter is particularly representative of current scholarship that reevaluates the skyscraper
as economic indicator, not just aesthetic object. Andrew, Bruegmann, and Schulze handle
individual Chicago School-inspired architects, while Berlage, Mumford, and Sullivan
represent original sources.
Andrew, David S., Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1985
Berlage, Hendrik Petrus, translated by Iain Boyd Whyte and Wim de Wit, Santa
Monica, California: Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1996
Bluestone, Daniel M., | New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1991
Bruegmann, Robert, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997
Condit, Carl W., | Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952; revised edition, as
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964
Goldberger, Paul, New York: Knopf, 1981
Huxtable, Ada Louise, New York: Pantheon, 1984
Mumford, Lewis, New York: Harcourt Brace, 1931
Pierson, William Harvey, and William H.Jordy, 4 vols., Garden City, New York:
Doubleday, 1970-78
Schulze, Franz, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985
Sullivan, Louis, “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered” (1896), in
edited by Leland M.Roth, New York: Harper and Row, 1983

Van Leeuwen, Thomas A.P., The Hague: AHA Books, 1986; as
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1988
Willis, Carol, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1995

CHILE

Chile is characterized by geographic isolation. Elongated and narrow, the country is
confined by strong natural barriers: a bleak desert on the north, the freezing Antarctic
area on the south, the towering Andes mountain chain on the east, and the Pacific Ocean
on its entire western side. This separation, combined with the absence of a strong pre-
Hispanic culture such as those that highly influenced other Latin American countries,
greatly shaped the nation’s architecture during the 20th century.

Because the population is mostly of European origin, there is a

discontinuity between the cultural links with a different continent and the

great distances from all the major centers of Western civilization.
Architects and planners struggle to find Chile’s own image, with very little

historic precedent.

In the first two decades of the 20th century, Chilean architecture was dominated by a
strong academic tradition. The influence of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts produced important
institutional and residential buildings. The Palace of Beaux-Arts (1910), by Emilio
Jecquier, combined Bourbon language and diverse ornamental motifs. Jecquier also
produced the buildings for the Catholic University in Santiago (1914), a complex of
excellent harmony and urban significance. Any reaction to the academic style was slow
and marked by discontinuity. Diverse movements were adopted according to the
circumstances dictated by client needs or representational purposes, but the intense
theoretical debate and the search for newness that characterized turn-of-the-century
European architecture were absent in Chile.

The most important architects of the 1920s and early 1930s were Luciano
Kulezewsky, Ricardo Larrain Bravo, Miguel Davila, and Ricardo Gonzalez Cortés,
architects who exemplified a variety of current trends, including Art Nouveau, neo-
Colonial expressions, and Art Deco tendencies.

The democratic government of Alessandri Palma in 1920 and later the dictatorship of
Carlos Ibafiez began the process of modernization as well as the growth of administration
and public services. In 1928 an earthquake hit the city of Talca. All these factors
intensified Chile’s modernization and brought rationalization in construction techniques.

A representative Art Nouveau building, presently used as the College of Architects of
Santiago, was designed by Luciano Kulczewsky (1920). His own house (1920) was
designed in the Gothic Revival style, another indication of Chile’s conservative tastes.
Looking to regional traditions, another prominent architect, Ricardo Gonzalez Cortés,
combined decoration inspired from aboriginal Mapuche forms and Art Deco. Two
representative pieces of this tendency are the Caja de Crédito Hipotecario (1930) in
Santiago and the Building of Public Services (1935) in Talca. This combination of
regional forms and European styles indicated a desire to define a representative style.

Concurrently, the influence of the Chicago School manifested in the growing cities of
Santiago and Valparaiso. The first skyscraper, the Ariztia (1921), was built in Santiago
by Alberto Cruz Montt and Ricardo Larrain Bravo.

Rationalist architecture arrived in Chile when a new generation of architects returned
from Europe after visiting important Modern monuments. Representative of this
generation, Rodolfo Oyarztn, Roberto Davila, Sergio Larrain, and Alfredo Johnson
combined classical compositional devices with elements of modernism. Among the first
modernist buildings, the Oberpaur (1930) in Santiago, by Sergio Larrain and Jorge
Arteaga, incorporated elongated windows and a free plan. Similarly, the Hotel Burnier
(1930) in Osorno was designed in a modernist language by Carlos Buchmann.

In his important and influential 1929 visit to Argentina, Le Corbusier met the Chilean
diplomat Matias Errazuriz; the following year Le Corbusier designed a small vacation
home for him, located in Zapallar. Together with the house for Madame Mandrot, near
Toulon, the project for the Errazuriz house (unbuilt) was a radical departure from the
white, purist architecture of the 1920s. Although the impact of this new style of house
and the use of local materials did not immediately influence architecture in Chile, once


regionalist styles were legitimated outside the country (in Finland and Mexico), they
gained acceptance among Chilean professionals.

The assimilation of rationalist principles and a purist language characterized the
1930s. Rationalism dominated in the work of Sergio Larrain, Roberto Davila, and
Alfredo Johnson. These efforts were furthered when Davila worked with Peter Behrens
and Le Corbusier in 1932. The restaurant Cap Ducal (1936), by Roberto Davila, is
located in ViTla del Mar, overlooking the Pacific Ocean, and exemplifies the modernist
Chilean style. The Santa Lucia Building (1934) in Santiago, by Sergio Larrain and Jorge
Arteaga, uses forms of refined modernism including circular windows. The Hogar Parque
Cousifio (1939), by Aguirre and Rodriguez, isolated from any other urban reference,
shows the assimilation of Bauhaus-designed elements—such as asymmetrical
composition, (stilts), elongated windows, a terrace garden, and a free plan—combined
with a rationalist formula.

In 1939 an earthquake in Chilian, the presidency of Aguirre Cerda, and the beginning
of World War II created a new context for the development of a modern architecture in
Chile. During the 1940s architects in Chile continued their experimentation with
modernist forms. The Maritime Biology Laboratory in Montemar (1944), by Enrique
Gebhard, shows the strong influence of Brazilian modernism. Also important were the
Hogar Social Hipodromo Chile (1941), by Gebhard and Aguirre, which used modernist
materials such as glass, brick, and concrete combined with a regional stone for its walls.

The publication of | magazine, the incorporation of Chile in 1946 to CIAM (Congrés
Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne), and Josef Albers’s visit to the country in 1953
established modernist ideals in Chile. In the 1950s the proposals of CLAM influenced
several habitation complexes, among them the Unidad Vecinal Portales (1957) by Carlos
Bresciani, Fernando Castillo, Carlos Huidobro, and Hector Valdéz, a building that
incorporated for the first time in Chile the separation of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.

After World War II the influence of American culture and the dominance of the
International Style were evident. The new typology of a platform and tower appeared, as
in the case of the Plaza de Armas building (1955), by Sergio Larrain, Emilio Duhart,
Osvaldo Larrain, Sanfuentes, and Jaime Larrain. Another example is the Arturo Prat
building (1956), by S.Larrain and Duhart. Parallel to the full incorporation of the
International Style in the 1950s, some architects began to pay more attention to
significant differences in architecture throughout the many regions of Chile. For example,
the Hotel Antumalal (1952) in Pucén, by Jorge Elton, combines aboriginal craft,
materials from the area, and landscape.

The 1960s were characterized by a new generation of architects and a diversity of
tendencies. Emilio Duhart, who studied under Walter Gropius and later, in 1952, worked
for six months with Le Corbusier in the project for Chandigarh, applied his experience to
the building for the United Nations in Vitacura, near Santiago. Known as CEPAL
(Comision Econémica para America Latina), it was designed in 1966 in collaboration
with Christian de Groote. Duhart proposed a strong geometry with a simple square shape,
an elongated body with a sculptural conic shape and expressive details. The building
recalls the enclosed shape of Chandigarh’s Palace of the Assembly. The strong plastic
shapes contrast in their abstraction with the presence of the Andes in the background.


The lasting influence of Le Corbusier is seen in the Benedictine Monastery in Las
Condes, Santiago de Chile. This monastery was built in a time spanning almost 30 years.
The unity reached through diverse interventions is the most important lesson of the
complex. The monastery was designed by Jaime Bellalta in 1954 and the cemetery by
Brother Martin Correa in 1954. In 1964 P.Gros planned the hostel, and in 1965 Brothers
Martin Correa and Gabriel Guardia designed the church. Jorge Swinburn planned the
refectory (1974), while R.Irarraval designed both the access plaza (1975) and the library
(1980). The complex is related to the topography of the hill and built with exposed
concrete, white stucco on brick, and details in wood. The most prominent feature of the
monastery is the church, consisting of two cubes slightly rotated that create a strong yet
simple space for prayer and ritual. Light generates a serene atmosphere and provides the
space with its spiritual character. This simple and austere church constituted a key piece
in Latin American architecture, comparable to Cavari’s Fatima church in Argentina,
Oscar Niemeyer’s church in Pampulha, and Eladio Dieste’s church in Atlantida.

Process and collaboration throughout time characterize the Open City in northern
Chile. In the 1960s a group of architects from the Catholic University of Valparaiso
began to question both the principal tenets of the International Style and the relationship
between client and architect. This challenge would culminate in the 1970s with the
remarkable experience of the Open City. Located in the dunes of Ritoque, overlooking
the Pacific Ocean, the buildings were erected without plans and based on a collaborative
design inspired by the Maudés poets of France, a movement that proclaimed
responsiveness to life and emancipation from rules.

Throughout the 1960s and part of the 1970s, Christian democratic and socialist
governments emphasized the need for housing and other social programs. Among others
it is important to mention the complex CORVI (1960), by Bruna Camus, Calvo Barros,
Perelman, and Sepulveda, a project inspired by Le Corbusier’s Unite d’Habitation at
Marseilles.

Since the 1980s, the term coined by Cristian Fernandez Cox, has taken center stage
in Latin American architectural debates. denotes both the appropriations of modernity’s
values and ways to make it suitable to the Latin American context. A new sensibility
characterized this architecture of the 1990s: a conscious effort to recover typologies
rooted in the region, the search for cultural identity, the use of traditional technologies
combined with modern devices, and the exploration of the unusual sculptural qualities of
ordinary materials.

Edward Rojas’s work exemplifies this approach. In his Modern Art Museum in
Chiloé, outside the town of Castro, Rojas restored a warehouse built by Isaac Eskenazzi,
who in the 1970s combined Modern aspects with regional typologies and materials. Rojas
renovated the structure of the roof and floor and added a new building, a modest wooden
shed. The combination of minimalist devices and regional types created a rich and simple
museum adapted to the needs of the site and locale.

Mathias Klots’s Hotel Terrantai in San Pedro is equally context driven. Located in
Atacama, a dry, northern area of the country, the small hotel was structured around a
communal space. The project incorporated an existing house and kept the low profile of
the context, composed mostly of adobe constructions. Inside, the structure combines
broad expanses of glass and bleached timber floorboards with Andean-style terracing and
textured walls.


The Consorcio-Vida Building (1999) by Enrique Browne and Borja Huidobro, is
located in an elegant area of Santiago. The western facade, elongated and rounded, has
staggered steps and trellises that generate a vertical garden of 16 levels. Protected by
trellises that add a second skin, plants reduce up to 60 percent of solar heat gain. The
building represents an appropriate modernity, as it incorporates recent tendencies and
languages with an attention to sustainable design, local influences, and the economic
reality of the country. The El Cerro House (1994), by Cristian Undurraga and Ana Devés,
exemplifies a subtle reference to several precedents and a respect for the site. Two
elongated walls, submerged in the hill, contain all the functions of the home in several
levels and a terrace. Because all access is lateral, the only portal in the facade opens to
the garden. Refined and minimal, the project refers to multiple figurative types.

Enrique Browne speaks of the permeability of Chilean culture, also characterized by
the lack of direct relationship between sociopolitical events and architectural production.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the principles of rationalism were not fully
understood. As in many other Latin American countries, Chilean architects were attracted
to modernism by its technical appeal rather than the Utopian and political origins that
characterized contemporary changes in Europe.

Although 60 percent of the population is concentrated in the metropolitan area of
Santiago, the country is geographically expansive. This situation has created a fertile
ground for exploration of differences in materials and traditions as well as the regional
adaptability to the rigors of extreme climatic conditions. An uncritical acceptance of
modernist postulates has been transformed to a new respect for architectural heritage and
the environment. One of the most important elements of 20th-century architecture in
Chile is the tension and permanent dialectic between universal tendencies and the spirit
of the place. Chile, with its economic prosperity and innovative spirit, is considered one
of the most dynamic and active architectural cultures in Latin America.

JOSE BERNARDI
Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Niemeyer, Oscar

(Brazil); Parliament Building, Chandigarh; Santiago, Chile

Further Reading

Boza Diaz, Cristian (editor), Bogota, Colombia: Escala, 1990
Klotz, Mathias, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1997
Pendleton-Jullian, Ann M, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press and Chicago:
Graham Foundation for Advanced Study in the Fine Arts, 1996
— Barcelona: Fundacié Mies van der Rohe, 1999
Riera Ojeda, Oscar (editor), | Gloucester, Massachusetts: Rockport, 1997
Riera Ojeda, Oscar (editor), Gloucester, Massachusetts: Rockport, 1999
Roca, Miguel Angel (editor), London: Academy Editions, 1995
— edited by Diane Gray, with Anna Bes, Ariadna Gilabert, Griselda Masso;
translated by Richard Rees and Mireia Alegre, Barcelona: Fundacié Mies van der Rohe,
2000

CHINA

The development of architecture in 20th-century China followed closely its political
evolution. Starting out as an imperial regime nearly colonized by Western powers, China
was declared a republic in 1911, only to fall into the chaos of the warlord period a year
later. With the Japanese invasion of China in 1937, the country was engaged in eight
years of warfare. When the Communists first took power in the country in 1949, after
four years of civil war following the Japanese surrender, China enjoyed ten years of
stability. A series of political campaigns took place between 1959 and 1976, disrupting
the normal functioning of the country. In 1979 China adopted an economic opendoor
policy; foreign and multinational companies were invited to invest and trade in the
country. This resulted in a booming economy and strong foreign trade in the last decades
of the 20th century. Architectural style, spatial conception, architectural symbolism, the
choice of architect, and construction technology were all directly influenced by the
country’s political, commercial, and cultural development.

Up until 1911, most buildings constructed in China were of the distinctive
traditional style with a timber post-and-beam structure supporting a heavy
and curved tile roof. In-filled wall between the timber frames was of
timber, brick, or pounded earth construction. Buildings were normally ofa
single story; only an exceptional structure such as a pagoda or a town
tower was of two- or multiple-storied construction. Several buildings were
arranged around a courtyard, and a few courtyards lined up along a central
axis or two or three axes made up a complex. Building types were
extremely limited in traditional China, which included palaces, princes,
and official residences, government offices, temples and altars, shops,
academies, ancestral halls, houses, and gardens all sharing the same form,
construction, and spatial layout. Western architecture appeared in China
with the introduction of new building types from the West. These included
churches, custom houses, railway stations, and commercial offices. Fine
examples of churches include the neobaroque Catholic South Church in
Beijing of 1657 and the neo-Gothic Holy Trinity Cathedral in Shanghai,
designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott and constructed in 1866. A small
railway station was built outside the imperial gate of Beijing in 1900. The
introduction of Western-styled buildings at the beginning of the 20th
century set the scene for Chinese architecture and more dramatically, the
International Style had by the end of the century completely obliterated
the traditional architectural environment in the cities. The remaining
Chinese characteristics are seen only in the buildings of nationalistic style.
The architectural development can be divided into four periods: the
introduction of Western-styled architecture (1900-28), the Modern

movement or national style (1929-49), a period of pragmatism coupled
with the search for a new national identity (1949-79), and a period of
intense internationalization (1979-2000).

1900-28

With the signing of the Nanjing treaty with Great Britain in 1842, five port cities were
designated for foreign trade where Western merchants could set up trading houses. In
1850 the British set up the first concession in Shanghai, and Western-style buildings and
city planning began to appear in major cities of China. Most Western-style buildings in
China in the 19th century were neo-Gothic and neoclassical churches, arcaded shop
houses, embassy buildings, and industrial buildings. Many houses, shop buildings, and
offices were also built in the Colonial style first seen in the British colonies of India and
Southeast Asia. After the Boxer Rebellion of 1900, the influence of Western powers in
urban China became more apparent, expressed visibly through the increased number of
foreign concessions filled with Western-styled buildings. These buildings were designed
by foreign architects and engineers following closely the stylistic development of
European architecture. These foreign professionals brought with them the specialized
discipline of architectural design, which hitherto had been carried out by master builders
of the craft tradition.

Church buildings were designed according to denominational preference. The twin-
tower Xujiahui Cathedral in Shanghai was completed in 1910, designed by British
architect W.M. Dowdall in French Gothic for a Jesuit missionary. English redbrick
Gothic Revival style can also be seen in many Protestant churches throughout the
country. The Catholic church in the former French concession in Tianjin was built in the
French Romanesque style and completed in 1916. These buildings with tall spires
dominated the low skylines of traditional Chinese cities. In prosperous trading cities,
however, more and more bank and commercial buildings reached greater and greater
height. Many early bank buildings were in the neoclassical style, as in the West. The first
bank building to be erected on the Bund in Shanghai was the St. Petersburg Russo-
Asiatic Bank, completed in 1901 and designed by H. Becker. This was the first building
in China to be constructed with reinforced-concrete, equipped with modern conveniences
and an elevator. However, the most impressive of bank buildings in this age must have
been the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank building designed by British architects Palmer
and Turner and completed in 1923. This seven-storied steel-framed building was
decorated in the neoclassical style surmounted by an imposing dome.

Apart from these buildings that are shadows of their European prototypes,
ecclectic-style buildings mixing traditional Chinese architecture with the
Western style were also attempted. The earliest example in this style is the
Peking Union Medical College in Beijing, designed by Harry Hussey
between 1916 and 1918. The scale and proportion of these buildings are
clearly Western classical in inspiration, whereas the details and the

gigantic roof are Chinese. Many foreign architects adopted this style for

residences, churches, and colleges, among whom the most accomplished
was American architect Henry K.Murphy (1877-1954), who completed
many university campus projects in what he called “Adaptive Chinese
Renaissance” style (Cody, 1989).

1929-49

This period of modernist nationalism in architecture is significant in the development of
20th-century Chinese architecture in that many Chinese architects trained abroad returned
to make important contributions to the architectural scene. Among these were Zhuang
Jun, who returned from the University of Illinois, Urbana, in 1914; Liu Dunzhen returned
from Japan in 1923; and Yang Tingbao, Tong Jun, and Liang Sicheng all graduated from
the University of Pennsylvania and returned to China between 1927 and 1930. These
architects either taught in the first architectural schools in China, worked for foreign
architects in China, or formed partnerships in private practice. Their monumental designs
with minimal decorations were a direct result from their monumental training in the
Beaux-Arts tradition in the West. In this they followed the Hungarian architect L.E.
Hudec, whose modernist architecture was first seen in a church completed in 1925 and
some residences. The Chinese architects were increasingly given major commissions,
such as government buildings, banks, hotels, commercial buildings, and academic
buildings. Some high-rise buildings along the Shanghai Bund are also modernist in spirit.
Chinese architects influenced by the Bauhaus also designed buildings with clean lines
and devoid of decorations.

The other architectural style seen in this period was developed from the
Chinese ecclectic style of the foreign architects working for foreign
missions. With the Chinese style roof as the prominent feature of the style,
it was considered as a national style promoted heavily by the newly
formed national government at the end of the 1920s. Many government
buildings were constructed in this style in the new capital, Nanjing
(designated in 1927 and the planning of which was undertaken by Henry
Murphy). In 1929 a competition for the mausoleum for Sun Yat-sen, the
father of nationalistic China, was organized, and the brief clearly asked for
a nationalistic style. The winning design submitted by Lu Yanzhi displays
a symmetrical monumentality based on the Lincoln Memorial while
incorporating distinctive Chinese elements, including the roof, bracket
system, window surrounds, and decorative architrave. Just as the foreign
architects saw in the style the representation of Chinese tradition, the
government used the style for nation building. However, the style was
increasingly criticized by the advocates of the Modern movement for
being wasteful in material and for not representing the spirit of the modern
society China was moving toward. Heated debates were fully argued in

architectural journals for many years in the 1930s, only to be abruptly cut
due to the Japanese occupation of eastern China between 1937 and 1945.

1949-79

After the setting up of the People’s Republic of China, institutional buildings were
designed following closely the Russian Monumental style. Between 1949 and 1957,
Russian experts helped in building the new China by promoting the principle of
neoclassicist monumentality with Chinese characteristics. Together with the first Five-
year Plan, many new functionalistic buildings were constructed for the new social order.
Invariably, these buildings are symmetrical both on the facade and in the internal layout.
Over the central entrance is usually a high tower. This form had a long-lasting influence
on the modern Chinese architectural style right through to the end of the century, due
partly to the influence of the centralizing symmetry of traditional Chinese architecture.
Two good examples are the Sovietdesigned Beijing and Shanghai Exhibition Halls of
1954.

With the Communist rule also came the reform of architectural practice.
Replacing the private architectural and engineering offices were many
state-owned design institutes, which are comprehensive professional
offices surviving to this day (Lin, 1988). At the end of the 1950s, Russian
experts were expelled from China, and the leading design principle
adopted was essentially nationalistic. However, unlike the earlier Chinese
Renaissance style of foreign architects or the national style of the 1930s,
the nationalistic style of this period was much restrained, using less of the
massive tiled roof and relying more on minor traditional decorative
elements. The ten major projects to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the
founding of the People’s Republic are important examples of this style.
Completed in 1959, some of these buildings are located at the heart of
Beijing, such as the Great Hall of the People (Zhao Dongri) and the
Revolutionary and History Museum (Zhang Kaiji). And others served
important political and infrastructure functions, such as the Cultural Palace
of Nationalities (Zhang Bo) and the Beijing Railway Station (Chen
Dengao). Other examples of this nationalistic style can be seen in other
parts of the country, such as the Great Hall of the People in Chongqing
(Zhang Jiade, 1954). Soon after the tenth anniversary, the country was
thrown into turmoil again with many political movements culminating in
the Cultural Revolution—all normal social activities stopped until 1976.
However, there were also pragmatic functionalist buildings constructed
even in this period, such as the extension to the Beijing Hotel (Dai Nianci,
1974).

1979-2000

With the liberalization of the Chinese economy in 1979, the nationalistic style continued
to be adopted only for political purposes during this period of internationalization. This is
particularly apparent in buildings along the main east-west boulevard of Beijing,
Chang’an Jie, which are required by city officials to adopt national characteristics in their
form. This is accomplished by adding small Chinese pavilions on otherwise multistoried
modern buildings. However, there was also more genuine integration of the two forms,
such as the Beijing Library (Yang Yun, 1987), the Beijing West Railway Station (Zhu
Jialu, 1996), and the Peking University Library (Guan Shaoye, 1998). In these attempts
large tiled roofs appeared again on top of tall buildings, much like the examples from the
1920s. The search for a new Chinese architecture had found a new interpretation in the
Fragrant Hill Hotel completed in 1982. In it LM.Pei used traditional elements from
southern China, such as diagonal windows and whitewashed walls, integrated in modern
and yet distinctive Chinese spaces. Similar examples designed by Chinese architects
include the Queli Hotel in Qufu (Dai Nianci, 1984) and a housing design in Ju’er Hutong
in Beijing (Wu Liangyong, 1990).

However, the most significant development of the period was the return of foreign
architects to the Chinese architectural scene in the last two decades of the century. They
were involved in joint ventures with local design institutes in the design of new hotels
operated by major Western hotel chains, such as the Beijing Jianguo Hotel (1982), the
Great Wall Sheraton of Beijing (1983), the Nanjing Jinling Hotel (1983), and the Crystal
Palace Hotel (1987). These buildings served important purposes of introducing the
International Style and modern construction technology to China, rapidly updating China
from its 20-year isolation from the rest of the world. In the 1990s other commercial and
cultural projects also benefited from international designers. These included the Beijing
Chinese-Japanese Youth Center (Kisho Kurokawa, 1990), the Shanghai Center (John
Portman and Associates, 1990), the Shanghai Grand Theater (Arte Jean Marie
Charpentier and Associates, 1998), the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
Building, Beijing (Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, 1998), and the Bank of China, Beijing
(I.M.Pei and Partners, 1999). Some of these were the first facilities built to international
standards in China. The Shanghai Grand Theater has successfully utilized the curtain wall
both as a symbol of modernization in the day and a bright jewel at night. The curved roof
soaring into the sky is reminiscent of the traditional curved roof of south China and is a
source of inspiration for many buildings in China. Although some architects were
particularly sensitive to the local context, the majority designed massive curtain-wall
buildings totally out of context with the surroundings. Sadly, these buildings became the
icons of modernization and were copied all over China in a lesssatisfactory manner.

With the development of Pudong district in Shanghai, imposing skyscrapers, unseen
before in China, started to dominate the generally flat skyline. The two most notable
examples from this district are the 421-meter-tall Jin Mao Building (Skidmore, Owings
and Merrill, 1998) and the 460-meter World Financial Center (KPF Associates, 2000).
These projects were mainly won in an international competition, which was becoming the
norm for larger and joint-venture projects in the late 1990s. The foreign designers of
these projects were clearly sensitive to the Chinese tradition within which the buildings
are located. They often incorporated Chinese elements, motifs, or symbolism in their

design. For example, the tallest building in China, the Jin Mau Building, was conceived
as a Chinese pagoda with a shimmering curtain wall, whereas the Word Financial Center
was designed to invoke the Chinese conception of the heaven as round and the earth as
square.

Other than the nationalistic and International Styles, there are Chinese architects who
boldly attempt architectural symbolism in building form. The Shanghai Museum is
designed in the shape of an ancient bronze cauldron (Xing Tonghe, 1996), and the
Memorial to the Victims of Japanese Massacre used a stark granite surface and dry
landscape to evoke the extreme horror of the massacre (Qi Kang, 1985). However, the
most controversial project that epitomizes the tension between internationalism and
nationalism in architecture is the winning entry of the design competition for the National
Grand Theater of China in Beijing. The design of Paul Andreu consists of a gigantic glass
dome covering three separate theater structures. Located next to the Great Hall of the
People, the heart of political China, this project has generated heated debates in the local
architectural community and was put on hold in 2000. The stark contrast of the
ultramodern structure with nationalistic architecture at such an important site and the
cultural symbolism of the glass dome are two major objections to the scheme. On the
other hand the supporters argue that China needs national icons of this sort to launch
itself into the new millennium. This is perhaps a clear indication that Chinese architecture
was standing at the crossroad at the end of the century. The desperate search for a
Chinese identity has so far yielded no satisfactory answer. In the meantime, the pressure
of commercial development has produced two extremes: well-conceived buildings
designed by international offices and big design institutes in major cities, and mediocre
buildings by the thousands all over the vast country.

PUAY-PENG HO
Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong; Liang Sicheng (China); Lu Yanzhi

(China); Wu Liangyong (China)

Further Reading

Cody, Jeffrey, “Henry K.Murphy: An American Architect in China, 1914-1935,” Ph.D.
diss., Cornell University, 1989
Cole, Doris, “Building a New China,” 9 (1988)
Dai, Nianci, “On the Design of Queli Hotel,” 4 (1986)
Kurokawa, Kisho, London: Academy Editions, and New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1992
Lin, Chen, “The Beijing Building Design Institute,’ 6 (1988)

Liu, Erming, and Yi Feng (editors), (International Architects in China: Selected
Works since 1980), Beijing: Zhongguo ji hua chu ban she and Zhongguo da bai ke quan
shu chu ban she, 1999
Liu, Erming, and Yi Feng (editors), (bilingual Chinese-English edition),
Beijing: Zhongguo ji hua chu ban she and Zhongguo da bai ke quan shu chu ban she,
1999
Portman, John C., “An Architecture for Contemporary China,” 12 (1990)

CHOISY, AUGUSTE 1841-1904

Architectural engineer and historian, France

Frangois Auguste Choisy is in many ways the ideological link between significant
individuals such as Eugéne Viollet-le-Duc and Auguste Perret and Vitruvius and Le
Corbusier; his influence on the beginnings of the Modern movement was fundamental.
Born in 1841, Choisy was the son of an architect practicing in Vitry-le-Francois in
northeastern France. His interests in mathematics and architecture quickly led him to the
Ecole Polytechnique under Léonce Reynaud, author of the influential (1860; Treaty on
Architecture), and eventually to the prestigious Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées. His
professional career as civil engineer originated in 1865, while still within the junior ranks
of the latter institution, when he was dispatched to the Rhone region; there, he began to
investigate the significance of the surrounding Gallo-Roman monuments. During the
same year he traveled to Greece, undertaking technical analyses of, among other
monuments, the Parthenon; his work on stylobate and column curvature remains
important within the study of classical architecture. Graduating second at the Ecole des
Ponts et Chaussées in 1866, he was awarded a travel bursary that he ultimately used to
visit Italy.

In 1868 Choisy took on his official duties as engineer within the Département des
Ponts et Chaussées at Rethel, France. In 1870 he met Viollet-le-Duc, who was already
well known for his (1863-72; Commentaries on Architecture). Choisy remained with
the government department for his entire career, moving up the ranks as chief engineer
and eventually inspector general, all the while teaching architectural history at the Ecole
des Ponts et Chaussées, the Ecole d’Horticulture de Versailles, and the Ecole
Polytechnique. His interests extended beyond historical studies, organizing the public
works programs for the French installations at the universal expositions in Vienna (1873),
Philadelphia (1876), Melbourne (1880), and Paris (1878, 1889, and 1900).

During his initial sojourn in Italy, Choisy began outlining his first substantial
publication, (1873; The Art of Roman Building). His interpretation of Roman
building technique focused on brick masonry and vault construction; he emphasized that
material and labor thriftiness was central to Roman construction, modeling his analyses
in part on Robert Willis’s work and ultimately comparing his own observations to the
words in Vitruvius’s (1st century B.C.; The Ten Books on Architecture). Choisy used
a complex three-dimensional drawing technique, the plunging isometric, which allowed
for the depiction of plan, elevation, section, and interior layout within single engravings.
The work established him as an authority in classical architecture, and similar studies
followed, including (1883; The Art of Byzantine Building), (1883; Epigraphic
Studies on Greek Architecture), (1904; The Art of Egyptian Building), and his tour de
force, (1899; The History of Architecture).

Comprehensive and systematic, Choisy’s 1899 architectural history book was a textual
and visual account of building methods in culture, time, and space; it included his own
1700 drawings, presenting the culmination of his lectures and studies, distilled within a
comprehensive analysis of architecture from prehistory to the end of the 18th century.
Each historical section was first contextualized within the broader work, with the
technical aspects of building following immediately afterward. Choisy’s thesis that form
follows local environmental and cultural conditions was buttressed throughout the book,


underscoring his view that architecture is generated by the collective and not the
individual. To the historian, style and form derive from the creative use of materials,
labor, and ideas; architecture is the result of the adaptations of historical precedents on
the one hand and the solution to immediate problems on the other. The connection
between form and technique was thus achieved, making the influence of Viollet-le-Duc
abundantly clear. In his section on Gothic architecture, in fact, Choisy bases much of his
discussion on the work of the latter as well as on Willis’s, further elaborating their
theories and subsequently contributing to the spread of their ideas.

As with his discussion of the Gothic, Choisy refined previous theories, particularly as
they related to Greek architecture. He advanced the thesis that Greek builders did not rely
solely on symmetry and axial alignment, as previous historians had often concluded; he
noted that the ensemble of monuments interacted within more complex landscapes. He
went back to his studies of the Parthenon—a model that Le Corbusier would echo just a
few decades later. Coupled with Choisy’s translation of Vitruvius’s (published
posthumously in 1909), the served as a base text for the theory expounded in Le
Corbusier’s (1923; Toward a New Architecture). Le Corbusier turned to Choisy’s
history book for Parthenon and Acropolis details, pointing to symmetrical buildings
arranged within asymmetrical site layouts and discussing the evolution of classical types.
Central to Le Corbusier’s thesis was that pure architecture works on an emotive level
with the viewer. He termed _ the act of controlling emotion by visual stimulus; the term
was translated in his as “contour and profile.” This, of course, was directly tied to
Choisy’s notion that the Greeks used contours and profiles to arrive at their optical
corrections; Choisy borrowed from Vitruvius in his examination of moldings, adding his
own ideas relating to the use of light in controlling the viewer’s experience. Le Corbusier
in turn followed Choisy and adapted ideas on light within his theoretical principles.

In 1903, just before his death, Choisy received the Royal Institute of British
Architects’ Gold Medal for his lifetime contribution to the study of architecture and, in
significant ways, to the meaning of architectural history during the early 20th century.

DANIEL MILLETTE

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France)

Selected Publications

(The Art of Roman Building), 1873
(The Art of Byzantine Building), 1883
(Epigraphic Studies on Greek Architecture), 1883
(The History of Architecture), 1899
(The Art of Egyptian Building), 1904

Further Reading

Very little has been written on Choisy or his career. A brief synopsis by Annie Jacques is
included within the 1991 edition of the (Paris; Inter-Livres). It includes quotes from
Maurice d’Ocagne’s (1930) short text on Choisy’s writings; d’Ocagne was an engineer
who replaced Choisy in one of his positions at the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées. More
recently, Richard Etlin (1987) provides a careful study examining the links between
Choisy and Le Corbusier, and Fernand Pouillon (1994) records an analytical
commentary.
Etlin, Richard A., “Le Corbusier, Choisy and French Hellenism: The Search for a New
Architecture,” 69/2 (1987)
d’Ocagne, Maurice, Vannes: Lafolye et J. de Lamarzelle, 1930
Pouillon, Fernand, Paris: Altimira, 1994

CHRYSLER BUILDING

Designed by William Van Alen, completed 1930 New York City

The Chrysler Building, designed by William Van Alen, stands 77 stories tall at
Lexington Avenue between 42nd and 43rd Streets in Manhattan, and is considered one of
the most famous and admired skyscrapers in the world. The Chrysler Building owes this
position primarily to its distinctive tower, which terminates in a series of curves that
support a final pointed spire. At night, v-shaped light patterns mark the successive curves,
keeping the structure conspicuous around the clock.
The building occupies an easily visible site, across the street from the Grand Central
Terminal, where subway lines, commuter rail lines, and long-distance rail lines converge.
Other buildings in the area attract less attention because their towers are rectilinear, and
thus commonplace. Not only does the Chrysler spire draw attention at close range as well
as from afar, but also the ground floor features tall, angular entrances, a lavishly
decorated lobby, and beautifully inlaid elevator cabs. Several setbacks along the
building’s silhouette have easily visible decorations including metal eagles, winged
radiator caps, and a brick frieze of Chrysler automobiles. The combination of stiff
stylization and recognizable imagery marks a phase of the style known as Art Deco, an
amalgam of French-inspired semi-abstraction and popular, easily intelligible subject
matter. The decorative forms at the Chrysler Building are more energetic than the more
classicizing ones used at the contemporary Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
All this came about when Walter Chrysler, Jr., a free spirit in his family of automobile
industrialists, obtained the building site and existing plans in 1928. Between 1925 and
1929, highrise office construction in New York City expanded markedly, and a site
convenient to public transportation was an ideal one for luring tenants in a highly
competitive market. There are entrances to the subway and terminal system within the
building, so that people could avoid walking outdoors to reach their workplaces.


To design the project, Chrysler employed William Van Alen, a socially well-
connected architect trained in the neoRenaissance tradition of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts
who accommodated his work to the stylistic preferences of his clients. For Chrysler he
created a building that is seen as glamorous, amusing, and utilitarian all at once, although
it is rarely considered to exemplify serious high art. Neither architect nor client was
making a profound aesthetic or philosophical statement; the aim was pragmatic: to be
distinctive, as a good advertisement is. Van Alen was probably prodded by Chrysler to
design details in a more popular contemporary mode than was customary for this
architect.

The owner hoped to capture additional publicity by building the world’s tallest office
building. The tithe was then held by 40 Wall Street, but Chrysler expected that his
building in the newer office zone of midtown Manhattan would confirm a trend toward
relocation of major firms to the Grand Central area. He did not achieve his goal because
the owners of the nearby rival Empire State Building commissioned a last-minute change
of design from their architects and erected a higher tower. Nevertheless, the Chrysler
tower earns more aesthetic admiration.

The imaginations of architect and client were constrained by the zoning regulations of
New York City, which decreed that buildings taller than specified limits had to be set
back from the building line on several sides. The setback rules applied particularly to the
silhouette above a legal multiple of the adjacent street width. Above that level, the
building had to recede until it occupied only one-quarter of the site, at which point it
could rise as a tower to any height that the owner desired; this accounts for the setbacks
and tower of the Chrysler Building.

Their imaginations were also constrained by the building code, which required
provisions for safety and health, and also by the customs of the day. These determined
that tenants would not rent office space that was more than 30 feet from perimeter
windows, as deeper spaces were considered to lack sufficient light and air. Accordingly,
owners and architects designed insets, courtyards, and other receding forms to produce
maximal office space and minimal storage or service space, as the latter rented at lower
rates per square foot.

No constraints seem to have operated when it came to decorating the Chrysler
Building. At ground level, shops along the street and the entrances to the building were
given angular decoration, much of it in metal that forecast vibrant embellishments inside.
The lobby, entered from both Lexington Avenue and 42nd Street, appears triangular, thus
unusual in a city where axial lobbies are the norm. The Chrysler’s lobby is decorated in
warm colors of inlaid wood, of metal, and of paint. Above the marble and granite walls, a
ceiling mural by Edward Trumbull depicts the building, airplanes, the Chrysler
automobile assembly line, and other emblems of modernity. The 30 elevator cabs are
inlaid in wood veneer on steel, featuring simplified floral forms and geometric shapes,
separated into panels.


Chrysler Building, undated drawing (
1928-30), designed by William Van
Alen

© Museum of the City of New York
and The Port of New York Authority,
from the Leonard Hassam Bogart
Collection

The office floors have double-loaded corridors and office spaces that were standard at
the period of their construction; several revisions have-been made to parts of the interior
since the building was completed in 1930. At the top of the tower is a tall space,
furnished for dining and receptions. The exterior surface is made primarily of pale brick
over a steel frame; stainless steel marks the entrances, decorative details, and the tower.
Tower lighting, originally planned, was activated in 1981.

Minor alterations and restoration especially of the lobby, entrances, and ornamental
features, followed several changes of ownership. In 1978 the New York City Landmarks
Preservation Commission designated the Chrysler Building as a municipal landmark.
This prevents the owners from changing the designated features unless severe economic
hardship can be demonstrated. Aware of the building’s prestige, owners have generally

been willing to repair essential functional and ornamental features. The building is now
admired as a delightful relic of an optimistic era in skyscraper building and an urban icon,
although, having always functioned as an obvious selfadvertisement, it has not been
regarded as a seminal work of modern architecture.
CAROL HERSELLE KRINSKY
Art Deco; Empire State Building, New York; Skyscraper

Further Reading

Krinsky, Carol Herselle, “The Chrysler Preserved,” 67 (1979)

Robinson, Cervin, and Rosemarie Haag Bletter, New York: Oxford University Press,
1975
Stern, Robert A.M., Gregory Gilmartin, and Thomas Mellins, New York:

Rizzoli, 1987
Willis, Carol, | New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1995

CHURCH

The term “church” refers both to the Christian congregational body and to the buildings
in which public Christian worship takes place. Although churches share with secular sites
functional attributes common to all types of built structures, they also are endowed with
symbolic meanings consonant with their purpose as sites of sacred ritual. Because
international modernism, which dominated the middle years of the 20th century, was
selfreferential, antiemblematic, and ahistorical in character, its practitioners sought new
ways to express sacredness using space and light, with traditional forms reduced to subtle
references. Since the 1960s, however, symbolism has been recognized as implicit in all
architecture, countering the tendency Pier Luigi Nervi saw to “reduce the ‘house of God’s
people’ to a cold compound of human functions” (Bozzo, 1990).

Representations of sacredness respond to a number of different factors, including
ritual practice and conventional signification. Many forms are ancient in origin, dating
from the third century A.D., when public Christian observance first became legal under
the Romans. Early Christians adopted the basilica from Greek and Roman courts of
justice; the longitudinal interiors lit by a clerestory were ideal for congregational
assembly. The introduction of transepts gave rise to the Latin-cross plan, seen as an
emblem of that most fundamental of all Christian symbols. The Gothic rib vault,
perfected in the Ile de France in the 12th century, then elevated the basilica to the status
of quintessential Christian representation, because the Church of Rome was at the height
of its influence across Europe. Not only did the basilican or processional plan continue to


hold significance into the modern era, but also as recently as the early 20th century,
Gothic churches still were being built in the traditional manner.

Centralized plans based on Roman tombs and Greek treasure houses were reserved for
baptisteries and . During the Renaissance, however, both centralized and Greek-cross
plans enjoyed a wider use, because neo-Platonic aesthetics influenced architects to look
on these forms as symbols of divine perfection. It was only in the wake of the
Reformation that the Church of Rome decreed a return to more conventional sacred
expression to articulate its opposition to dissent.

For Protestant sects such as the Huguenots in France, architecture became a channel
through which to signify uniqueness. Classicist temples, on rectangular or octagonal
plans with banked seating around a central pulpit, were well suited to the delivery of
sermons, and they engendered a sense of communal worship. In many cases an
ideologically determined simplicity, central to the practice of reformed worship, also was
manifested not only in the temples of French Protestants but also in the early Puritan
meetinghouses of New England. As for banked auditoriums, they were identified with
Protestant observance, particularly after important German baroque examples such as the
Frauenkirche in Dresden, and because burgeoning evangelical congregations in North
America during the late 19th century were accommodated by necessity in church
amphitheaters with adjoining Akron-plan Sunday schools. Catholic churches only
adopted this type of iconography after the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s
authorized increased congregational participation.

The significance of plan type and architectural vocabulary in representing sectarian
allegiance also is indicated by a third important precedent from the 6th century, which
holds particular meaning for Christians of the Eastern rite. The domed interior of the
Hagia Sophia in Constantinople (now Istanbul), sustained on a square of four vast arches,
mediates between longitudinal and centralized space with the inclusion of semidomed
apses on the east and west. So impressive was its interior that it became an equally potent
symbol for the followers of Islam after the building’s conversion to a mosque in 1453,
when the Ottomans conquered the city.

In the opening years of the 20th century, the importance of tradition was
affirmed through a renewed interest in Gothic architecture. The
groundwork had been laid in the 1830s, when the Oxford Movement
reintroduced Catholic principles into Protestant Episcopal practice and
stimulated a move toward ecumenism. This in turn found architectural
justification in the writings of 19th-century theorists such as
A.W.N.Pugin, the ecclesiologists (formerly the Cambridge Camden
Society), John Ruskin, and John Ninian Comper in Britain; and in Europe,

through the writings of Eugene-Emanuel Viollet-le-Duc and Ro-


Crystal Cathedral, by Phillip Johnson
and John Burgee, Garden Grove,
California (1978-80)

© G.E.Kidder Smith/CORBIS

mano Guardini, among others. Pugin, in particular, proposed that pointed or Christian
architecture could edify society and at the same time exemplify rational design. By
combining sacred tradition with the chief principle of modernism, Pugin earned a place
among the pioneers of modern design and facilitated the survival of medieval forms into
the 20th century. Liverpool’s Anglican Cathedral by Gilbert Scott the younger, begun in
1904, affirmed the Gothic tradition in Britain, just as New York’s Cathedral of St. John
the Divine, begun by Heins and Lafarge in 1892 and continued by Cram and Ferguson,
did in the United States.

With the development of modern materials such as steel and reinforced concrete, it
was only a matter of time before convention gave way to new types of expression. French
architects Anatole de Baudot and his student Auguste Perret drew on the writings of
Viollet-le-Duc to translate traditional forms into modern materials. Baudot’s St.-Jean-de-
Montmartre (1904) was a groin-vaulted basilica executed in concrete, whereas Perret’s
Notre-Dame-Le-Raincy, featured a segmental, ferroconcrete shell vault extending the

length of the nave. This approach also was explored by Karl Moser at St. Anthony in
Basel, Switzerland (1927), and somewhat differently by Werner Moser in the Protestant
church of Altstretten in Zurich, Switzerland (1941). Otto Bartning’s Steel Church for the
Press Exhibition at Cologne, Germany (1928), realized a similar project in steel and
glass. In other instances, historical references were reduced to a minimum, as was the
case with Corpus Christi Church in Aachen, Germany (1930), by Rudolf Schwarz and
Hans Schippert, a simple concrete hall with clerestory windows with the merest trace of
an ancient basilica.

Attempts also were made to translate Gothic vaulting into a contemporary idiom. For
example, Antoni Gaudi conceived an extraordinary series of organic forms to complete
the more conventional 1882 design his mentor Villar had proposed for Sagrada Familia in
Barcelona. (More recently, Santiago Calatrava reinterpreted Gaudi's idiosyncratic
vocabulary in his 1991 Tree of Life design for the nave and transepts of New York’s St.
John the Divine.) In a similar manner, the paraboloid concrete barrel vault with low
transverse aisle vaults, which Domenikus Bé6hm adopted in the Catholic church of Christ
the King at Bischofsheim (1926), invested the basilica with what Henry-Russell
Hitchcock called “a strong emotional effect...both Gothic and Expressionist in tone.”
Two decades later, Oscar Niemeyer revisited the idea of the single bold paraboloid in his
Church of St. Francis of Assisi, Pampulha, in Belo Horizonte, Brazil, and fashioned a
transept from four undulating concrete shells. His approach found sympathetic
affirmation in the work of Spanish-born Felix Candela, who also created a basilica of
hyperbolic paraboloids for Santa Maria Miraculosa in Mexico City (1954).

Medievalism also pervades the regional expression of the Grundtvigs Church in
Copenhagen, Denmark (1913 and 1921-40), by Vilhelm Jensen-Klint. Its massive,
neotraditional brick facade harks back to Baltic vernacular, with an overscaled evocation
of a pipe organ conjured from a cathedral portico.

By 1952 the boxy, steel-and-glass chapel Ludwig Mies van der Rohe designed as part
of his campus plan for Chicago’s Illinois Institute of Technology had formulated the
fundamental problem of sacred architecture in the modern era—how to represent matters
of the spirit in the stark, universal geometry of international modernism. A different
approach was explored by Eero Saarinen and Associates in the interdenominational
Kresge Chapel at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1955). Its simple cylindrical
form, executed in red brick, was set on a moat of water that reflected dimly into the skylit
interior, where a beam of light precipitated on an ethereal retable of suspended brass
rectangles to invoke the divine as tangibly as any baroque (total work of art). That
same year Le Corbusier finished what has come to be recognized as the 20th century’s
most extraordinary example of sacred architecture, the Pilgrimage Chapel of Notre-
Dame-du-Haut at Ronchamp, in the Vosges, France (1955). Sculptural and massive, the
structure supported a soaring, sail-like roof on battened wedges of raw concrete, pierced
only by deep window wells that send light refracting into the deeply protected refuge of
the interior.

In the decades following these key syntheses, a variety of approaches were tested.
Marcel Breuer, Hamilton Smith, and Pier Luigi Nervi designed a church of concrete,
granite, and stained glass for St. John’s University in Collegeville, Minnesota (1961),
then announced its presence with a mammoth bell tower similar to the pylon of an
ancient temple. Concrete was also Alvar Aalto’s choice to create organic arcs of space in


the Vuoksenniska Church (1958) in Imatra, Finland, and again for a church at Riola, Italy
(1978). Less conventional still were the fortress-like blocks out of which Gottfried Bohm
forged the Pilgrimage Church (1968) at Neviges, Germany, its plan lobed around a
central pulpit. Equally powerful was the spectacular brick interior and fanned accordion
roof that Paul Rudolph designed with Fry and Welch for the interdenominational
Tuskegee Chapel (1969) at the Tuskegee Institute.

There were also consciously iconic approaches. Skidmore, Owings and Merrill opted
for a symbolism of site with a series of geometric aluminum tetrahedrons, like the
clustered wings of a plane, for the Air Force Academy Chapel (1963) at Colorado
Springs, Colorado.

By contrast, St. Mary’s Cathedral (1970) in San Francisco, by Pietro Belluschi, Pier
Luigi Nervi, and others, took up a more ancient iconography. Their white sailing ship of
poured concrete was a play on the concept of the nave or the ship of souls, and the
interior was conceived like a Gothic cathedral with stained-glass windows. Emblematic,
too, of consumer culture and the role of the automobile in North American life was
California’s Garden Grove Community Church (1978) by Philip Johnson and John
Burgee. Known as the Crystal Cathedral, its star-shaped hangar of steel and glass opened
to accommodate drive-in participants in the service.

Another strategy stressed awareness of the natural environment. Frank Lloyd Wright’s
sensitivity for both materials and site extended in his religious works to a spiritual
communion with nature. His First Unitarian Meetinghouse (1951) in Madison,
Wisconsin, introduced a monumental window beneath a triangular copper gable, which
opened up the sanctuary to its natural setting. His son, John Lloyd Wright, in turn took
the approach a step further in the contemporaneous Wayfarer’s Chapel at Palos Verdes,
California, its glass enclosure, framed in redwood, sanctifying silent communion with the
surrounding coastal scenery. Wright protégé E.Fay Jones refined the concept in the
Thorncrown Wayfarer’s Chapel (1981) for a hilltop site in the Ozark Mountains, near
Eureka Springs, Arkansas, one of several similar structures the architect has since
executed in other locations.

Some churches actually become one with the setting. Philip Johnson’s Shrine at New
Harmony, Indiana (1960), for example, consisted of a lobed, parabolic hood of timber, to
focus upon the concept of the sacred without actually circumscribing the space. By
contrast, in Sedona, Arizona, Ashen and Allen’s Chapel of the Holy Cross (1965) was
built into the red sandstone cliffs, while the domed Taivallahti Church (1969), in
Helsinki, Finland, by Timo and Tuomo Suomalainen, was blasted into bedrock, the crater
of which nested the footings of the interior. Stanley Tigerman’s St. Benedict’s Abbey
(1978) at Benet Lake, Wisconsin, was buried in the ground to express humility. A similar
integration executed in consciously vernacular terms by Auburn architecture professor
Sambo Mockbee and his students, working collectively as the Rural Studio, was realized
in the Yancey Chapel (1997) at Mason’s Bend, Alabama. A lean-to dug into the earth and
partly open to the sky, the chapel was built on a low budget for needy clients, without a
specific plan and from scavenged materials, including old tires, rusted I beams, large
trusses, pine from a century-house, tin from an old barn, and river slate.

Other architects have fused the geometry of international modernism with an
appreciation for the natural setting. For example, in 1957 Finnish architects Heikki and
Kaija Siren introduced a glass sanctuary wall into the linear geometry of their University


Chapel in Otaniemi, Finland, locating the altar against a natural screen of fir trees.
Similarly, contemporary Japanese architect Tadao Ando consciously combined the
spirituality of East and West in his Church on the Water (1988) in Hokkaido. Its two-
level structure, a roofless crown framed by four concrete crosses and a lower chapel with
a glass wall overlooking a lake, aspired to “constructed nothingness” through a hybrid of
geometry, nature, and materials that engaged the worshiper in a direct experience of
nature.

More primal in their impact were the works of Hungarian architect Imre Makovecz,
whose disturbingly anthropomorphic Mortuary Chapel (1977) in the Farkasret Cemetery,
Budapest, is matched only by the ligamented viscera that frame his Roman Catholic
Church (1990) in Paks, Poland. From cosmopolitanism to an experience of the sacred
expressed in highly personal terms, religious architecture of the 20th century is a
bricolage of tradition, ritual practice, formal expression, and an intangible articulation of
spirituality.

ANGELA K.CARR
Ando, Tadao (Japan); Calatrava, Santiago (Spain); Candela, Felix
(Mexico); Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, CharlesEdouard) (France); Chapel of
Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp, France; Gaudi, Antoni (Spain); Illinois
Institute of Technology, Chicago; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany);
Nervi, Pier Luigi (Italy); Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil); Notre Dame, Le
Raincy; Saarinen, Eero (Finland)

Further Reading

“Architectures Sacrées/Religious Architecture,” | 405 (December 1992)
45 (January-March 1977)
Bozzo, Gianni Baget, “Architettura e religione,” 718 (July/ August 1990)

Clausen, Meredith L., Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1992
Cook, Peter, and Rosie Llewellyn-Jones, | New York: Rizzoli, 1991
Coppa and Avery Consultants, Monticello, Illinois: Vance Bibliographies,
1980
Davey, Peter (editor), “Theme Issue on Architecture and Religion,” — 190 (April 1992)
Eaton, Leonard K., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1972

Frampton, Kenneth, and Yukio Futagawa, 2 vols., New York: Rizzoli, 1983 (see
especially volume 2: )
Gaskie, Margaret, “To Gather Together: Building Types Study 674, Religious
Buildings,” 178 (January 1990)
Gieselmann, Reinhard, New York: Architectural Book, 1972
Jodidio, Philip, Cologne: Taschen, 1993- (see especially volume 4, 1998)
Jodidio, Philip, Cologne and New York: Taschen, 1999

Joedicke, Jiirgen, Teufen, Switzerland: Niggli, 1958; as translated by James
C.Palmes, New York: Praeger, 1959; London: Architectural Press, 1961
Kennedy, Roger G., | New York: Stewart, Tambori and Chang, 1982
Kidder, GE.Smith, | New York: Holt, and London: Architectural Press, 1964

Klotz, Heinrich, New York: Rizzoli, and London: Academy Editions, 1989
LeBlanc, Sydney, New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1993; revised edition, as
1996

Mannell, Steven, “Places of Worship I: In a Rational Light, Abbey Church St. Benoit-du-
Lac, Quebec: Dan Hanganu, Architect,” 40 (October 1995)
Mazmanian, Arthur, Boston: Beacon, 1970
Mazria, Edward, “Edward Mazria: Sacred by Design,” 74-75 (March 1991)
Meyhéfer, Dirk, Cologne: Taschen, 1994
Pehnt, Wolfgang (editor), London: Thames and Hudson, 1963; New York: Abrams,
1964
Placzek, Adolf K. (editor), 4 vols., New York: Free Press, and London: Collier-
Macmillan, 1982

Risebero, Bill, London: Herbert Press, 1982; Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press, 1983
Sharp, Dennis, London: Heinemann, Seeker, and Warburg, and Greenwich,

Connecticut: New York Graphic Society, 1972; revised and expanded edition, as
New York: Facts on File, and London: Lund Humphries, 1991
Shear, John Knox (editor), New York: Dodge, 1957

Stern, Robert A.M., Gregory Gilmartin, and Thomas Mellins, New York:
Rizzoli, 1987
Stimpson, Miriam F., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1985

Wright, Lance (editor), ““Manplan 5,” 147 (March 1970)

CHURCH OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI
BELO HORIZONTE, BRAZIL

Designed by Oscar Niemeyer; completed 1943

In 1941 the mayor of Belo Horizonte, Juscelino Kubitschek, commissioned the
architect Oscar Niemeyer to build a series of buildings around Pampulha lake. These
included a yacht club, a dance hall, a casino, and a chapel, the latter of which is known as
the Church of St. Francis of Assisi (1943). Under Kubitschek’s influence Belo Horizonte,
the capital of the state of Minas Gerais, aspired to compete with the two hitherto
hegemonic metropolises, Sio Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. In 1938 the governor suggested
the need for a tourist hotel in the colonial city of Ouro Preto, a project that would be also
carried out by Niemeyer (1939). Kubitschek’s desire to introduce modern elements in a
city that still remained provincial and traditional motivated the urbanization of the lands
edging the artificial lake in Pampulha, situated fifteen kilometers from the city center,
and created for the recreation of Minas Gerais’s new industrial bourgeoisie.

Niemeyer invited artists Alfredo Ceschiatti and Candido Portinari and the landscape
architect Roberto Burle Marx to collaborate on the Pampulha projects, including the
Church of St. Francis of Assisi. In his designs Niemeyer abandoned the Cartesian system
of composition in favor of freely curving forms in space.

The small church is shaped by three basic elements: the bell tower linked to the light
access marquee, the nave covered by a freestanding vault, and the adjacent installations,
covered by three smaller reinforced-concrete domes. The blind facade of the chapel,
which faces the street, is embellished by a large mural by Candido Portinari of
Portuguese blue-and-white glazed tiles depicting scenes from the life of St. Francis of
Assisi. The nave is designed in two parts: the area for the faithful worshipers, accessed
through the horizontal slate of the choir, a low element that antecedes the surprise of the
vault’s parabolic expansion; and the altar space, lit from the ceiling’s apex that
establishes the difference in height between the two domes integrated in the central axis.
From the darkness of the nave, the miracle of light illuminates the wall of the altar that is
also covered with a painting by Portinari. From the exterior the chapel is apprehended
through the continuous fluidity of the domes and the transparent bell tower that appears
almost suspended in air by the light, curved, metallic supports.

Although these shapes were innovative for a religious building, Niemeyer was likely
inspired by several precursors, including the parabolic hangars of the Orly Airport (19 16—
24, Eugéne Freyssinet) and the Orbetello Airport (1935-38, Pier Luigi Nervi), the curved
ramps of the penguin pool at the London Zoo (1933-34, Berthold Lubetkin), and the
Zementhalle in Zurich (1939, Robert Maillart). These lightweight shells foreshadowed
the possibilities of reinforced concrete in the hands of talented structural engineers such
as Felix Candela and Eladio Dieste in Latin America. Joaquim Cardozo, Niemeyer’s
engineer, participated in the creation of the church. The avantgardism of Niemeyer’s
structure was widely rejected among the local clergy and the Minas Gerais bourgeoisie
who did not accept such secular forms for a religious building; in fact, the church
remained abandoned and converted to a radio station until 1959, when it became
definitively a church.

The urbanization project of Belo Horizonte unfortunately did not prosper, and
Pampulha began to decline, culminating in the contamination of the lake. Today,
Niemeyer’s buildings have been restored, and the area has been recuperated as a space
for public leisure. Some European critics, in particular Bruno Zevi (1953) and Manfredo
Tafuri (1979), argued that the chapel’s freedom of design was overly formulist. The
Italian critic Gillo Dorfles (1984) identified a nascent neobaroque modernism (or baroque
rationalism) in Niemeyer’s work. The French critic Jean Petit (1995) affirmed
Niemeyer’s autonomy from the prevailing European rationalism. According to Le
Corbusier, an early mentor and collaborator, Niemeyer was able to marry the
emotionalism of the baroque with the industrial and austere materials of reinforced
concrete. Without question, Pampulha in the 1940s emerged as the forerunner of the
expressive freedom of English and American Brutalism that emerged at the end of the
Second World War.

ROBERTO SEGRE
Burle Marx, Roberto (Brazil); Candela, Felix (Mexico); Church;
Concrete Shell Structure; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard)

(France); Costa, Lucio (Brazil); Nervi, Pier Luigi (Italy); Niemeyer, Oscar
(Brazil); Pampulha Buildings, Belo Horizonte, Brazil; Rationalism

Further Reading

Botey, Josep Maria, Barcelona: G. Gili, 1996
Botey, Josep Maria, and Miquel Dalmau, Barcelona: Caixa Barcelona, 1990

Bruand, Yves, Sao Paulo: Editora Perspectiva, 1981
Cavalcanti, Lauro, Rio de Janeiro: Taurus Editora, 1995
Dorfles, Gillo, Bari: Edizioni Dedalo, 1984

Niemeyer, Oscar, “De Pampulha ao Memorial da America Latina,” 100 (March 1989)
Papadaki, Stamo, New York: Reinhold, 1950
Pereira, Miguel Alves, Brasilia: Editora UnB, 1997

Petit, Jean, Lugano: Fidia Edizioni, 1995

Puppi, Lionello, | Milan: Arnoldo Mondadori, 1987

Sa Corréa, Marcos, Rio de Janeiro: Relume Dumara, 1996
Segawa, Hugo, Sao Paulo: Edusp, 1997
Tafuri, Manfredo, and Francesco dal Co, Volume 2, Milan: Electa Editrice, 1979
Underwood, David, New York: Rizzoli, 1994
Zevi, Bruno, Turin: Einaudi, 1953

CHURCH ON THE WATER

Designed by Tadao Ando; completed 1988 Hokkaido, Japan

Tadao Ando’s Church on the Water (1988) signaled a critical shift in the designer’s
approach and for that reason was widely heralded in the international press. Ando’s
earlier residential works were structured private domains that were isolated from their
surrounding urban contexts. The chapel, however, was a communal building designed for
an idealized landscape, Ando’s response to an earlier chapel on Mount Rokko (1986),
rather than for a specific site or client. This is why published presentation drawings do
not reflect the realities of the site, a point that would be otherwise odd, considering the
importance of nature in the design. It is also the reason that such a long period passed
between the building’s design in 1985 and its construction in Hokkaido in 1988.

In the Church on the Water, nature becomes an active force. The sanctuary is
essentially an open-ended shallow box, overwhelmed by a flat artificial pool. When the
only separation between the two territories, a large glass wall, is rolled to the side, it
erases any distinction between interior and exterior. Notably, this is also the only one of

Ando’s churches in which the altar area is depressed rather than raised, a gesture that
increases the sense of spatial continuity and that is echoed in shallow terraces in the pond.

In the 1986 essay “Mutual Independence, Mutual Interpenetration,” Ando wrote,
“Within a site, architecture tries to dominate emptiness, but at the same time emptiness
dominates the architecture. If a building is to be autonomous and have its own character,
not only the building but the emptiness itself must have its own logic.” There are clear
parallels between Martin Heidegger and Eastern thought that make it difficult to
determine the roots of Ando’s phenomenology, but this character of nothingness, found
in the blank pool, holds an important place in both philosophical systems. It is not God
but, rather, man in nature that is the focus of this chapel. As Ando declared, “To
experience God in this natural setting, perhaps, is to experience the encounter with one’s
own spirit” (Ando, 1989). Elsewhere, Ando goes further: “For me, the nature that a
sacred space must relate to is man-made, or rather an architecturalized nature. I believe
that when greenery, water, light or wind is abstracted from nature-as-is according to
man’s will, it approaches the sacred” (Ando, 1991).

The building was intended not as a religious structure but simply as a commercial
chapel for wedding services. In a country where only an infinitesimal percentage of the
population is Christian, the fashion of having “Christian” weddings is merely a reflection
of Westernization. Thus, many of the conventional accoutrements of a church are
unnecessary, in keeping with Ando’s characteristic ascetic minimalism. With economic
pros-perity in the 1980s, young Japanese also embraced the larger Christian wedding
ceremony as an opportunity for display. As a result, Ando’s wedding chapels share with
several other projects from the 1980s an irony: although he established a critical attitude
in opposition to the comfort and decorative tendencies in architecture of the period, his
works were embraced by the very consumer culture he denounced.

Some critics have implied that this was merely a “radical chic” gesture by fashionable
Japanese, but it is worth noting that Ando’s work was also compatible with a narcissism
characteristic of the time. In 1986, Ando was developing a conception of space based on
the physicality of the body and the use of the walls and floors as framing devices,
articulated in his 1988 Englishlanguage piece “Shintai and Space.” In Japanese, the word

has three meanings; the most common use of the word refers to religious icons and other
objects intended for worship. In addition, the word indicates one’s own body or a course
of action. Had Ando used Japanese characters in writing his piece, he would have had to
choose one of these meanings. In English, it was possible for him to fuse them; he
explains that refers not only to the body but also to “spirit and flesh” and declares that
the ofa site is grasped only through the .

It is difficult not to measure the space with one’s body. Small granite pavers in the
sanctuary are only slightly more than shoulders’ span in length. The markings of
formwork on Ando’s trademark concrete walls are the size of a single bed, and because
the walls of this building are almost three feet thick, the imprints of form-tie separator
cones are very close together. Risers are shallow and benches low, and the chairs for the
nervous bride and groom are fragile perches. Thus, despite Ando’s austere and even
brutish use of unfinished concrete, the building has a delicacy and human scale.

Kenneth Frampton notes that the Church on the Water was “patently influenced” by
Kaija and Heikki Siren’s Otaniemi Chapel (1957) for the Helsinki Institute of
Technology. The building is less often considered in literature today because the concepts


that Ando initiated here are more skillfully carried out in subsequent works. The religious
implications of architecture as a site for the body in nature are more convincingly
executed in the later Water Temple (1992). The shallow proportions of the Church on the
Water’s sanctuary led to Ando’s many outdoor amphitheaters, in which inconsequential
stages and the lack of a backdrop make nature the real drama—including the first, the
Theater on the Water (1987), planned for another site at the same Hokkaido resort. Even
the avatar-like cross standing in the pool and the framework of crosses on the roof of the
church later reemerged as freestanding colonnades forming spatial filters in Ando’s
works from the late 1980s.

Francesco Dal Co has written that Ando is “completing building after building with
astonishing speed, but only able to do so by falling back on the design and conceptual
procedures he had worked out in earlier researches.” In this designer’s work, it is often
not the variations on concepts that are of interest but their genesis. More than 15 years
after its completion, the Church on the Water remains a source of inspiration for the
architect; it is clearly the model for Ando’s Chapel of the Sea, completed at the end of
1999 as part of the Awaji Island Yume Butai.

DANA BUNTROCK

Siren, Heikki and Kaija (Finland)

Further Reading

Ando has written briefly on many of his works, both in English and in Japanese. The best
of these are collected in the — edited by Dal Co, which also includes a bibliography of
primary and secondary sources. Images of the Church on the Water are most numerous in
Drew and Frampton. The other books on this list offer a useful context, especially
demonstrating the development of the ideas first explored in this chapel.
Ando, Tadao, New York: Rizzoli, 1989
Ando, Tadao, Tokyo: Japan Architect, 1991
Ando, Tadao, — edited by Richard C. Levene and Fernando Marquez Cecilia, Madrid: El
Croquis, 1993
Ando, Tadao, edited by Francesco Dal Co, London: Phaidon, 1995
Drew, Philip, London: Phaidon, 1996
Frampton, Kenneth, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1991
Tokyo: Shinkenchiku-sha, 1992


CITE INDUSTRIELLE, UNE

Unbuilt project designed by Tony Garnier, completed 1917

(An Industrial Town, Study for the Construction of Towns, 1901-04, 1917),
Tony Garnier’s vast and complex project consisting of 164 plates for an imaginary
industrial town, incorporated classical, contemporary, and futuristic aspects. Modernist
architects considered it a significant pioneering work in modernism, one that retained
classical elements. Garnier himself, however, never participated in the Modern
movement. He practiced architecture without being overly concerned with the conflicts
between modernity and tradition. Later interpretations have compared the affinity of
with contemporary trends, such as the Garden City movement, debates on workers’
housing, Utopian literature, and the socialist tradition. | was foremost an innovation in
regional and town planning.

Garnier won the Rome Prize in 1899 as a student at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris
and studied in Rome for four years. There he worked on (which outraged the
conservative Académie des Beaux-Arts) and a project for the restoration of the ancient
city of Tusculum. Garnier exhibited drawings for in 1904. The final, expanded 1917
version incorporated numerous projects that were realized in Lyons, Garnier’s native city,
to which he returned in 1905. The same year, Garnier met the 33-year-old radical-
socialist mayor, Edouard Herriot. The two launched a program of construction that would
last three decades.

is an astoundingly thorough visualization, from its overall conception down to
individual houses. Garnier emphasized zoning, circulation, hygiene, and industry,
considering both communal and individual aspects of life in a town of 35,000 inhabitants.
The general plan is based on the French academic tradition. However, the parklike setting
and the emphasis on pedestrian routes are comparable to the English Garden City
movement led by Ebenezer Howard and to the ideas of Camillo Sitte. The site was to be
near raw materials, sources of energy, and communication routes. The three main
functions of the town—production, housing, and health facilities—are clearly
distinguished. Residential and public areas are placed on a plateau, and the industrial
complex is situated on the periphery by the river. At the center of the residential area is a
cluster of public buildings, including an assembly hall, museums, libraries, theaters, and a
sports center. Around the railroad station is a mixture of tall residential and commercial
buildings, including an open market and a clock tower. Residential quarters are arranged
on an urban grid divided into lots of 15 by 15 meters. Each building is linked to a
pedestrian route so that people could cross the city in all directions independently of the
roads. All houses are detached. Courtyards are eliminated, and every room is lit and
ventilated directly from the outside. Each bedroom has at least one south-facing window
that lets in plenty of sunlight. All the interior walls and floors are made of smooth
material. Only half the residential area was to be built up, whereas the other half was to
form a kind of a communal garden.


Garnier’s emphasis on hygiene, space, and the separation of pedestrian and automobile
traffic would resonate widely in the early 20th century. His conception of urban zoning
would have a profound impact on 20th-century town planning. Le Corbusier, who met
Garnier in 1907, was the first well-known architect to publicly acknowledge the influence
of in 1921. relies on reinforced concrete for the buildings that gives them a bare and
austere appearance. The houses are mostly free of ornamentation, with the exception of
several classical sculptures. The simplicity of material and means of construction were to
lead logically to great simplicity of expression in the structure, which then would support
a variety of decorative arts. Such ideas reveal an affinity with traditional architectural
theory, emphasizing preestablished harmonies. At the same time, Garnier’s influence
forced French architectural education to be more open to the concerns of New Urbanism.

Intellectual currents of the late 19th century provided inspiration for © Many French
intellectuals embraced ideals of social progress deriving from the socialist tradition of
Charles Fourier, visions of a scientific and technological utopia espoused in both French
and foreign novels, and renewed interest for antiquities. resembles the ideal city in
Emile Zola’s (1900-01); the assembly hall of has inscriptions from The absence of
a church, prison, court, police station, or military barracks fits with some of the
contemporary Utopian ideas, including the premise that society would provide medicine
and basic foodstuffs. Garnier’s premise rested on a systematic physical organization that
would best sustain the needs of the individual in a regional setting. In Lyons, Garnier
built a series of exemplary public buildings, such as a slaughterhouse-cattle market
complex (1909-13), an Olympic stadium (1913) with Greco-Roman allusions, and the
Grange-Blanche Hospital (1915), all of which were integrated into enabled Garnier
to integrate his conceptions into Lyons, an existing, complex city, and thereby contribute
significantly to 20th-century architecture and urban planning.

HAZEL HAHN
Garden City Movement; Garnier, Tony (France); New Urbanism; Urban

Planning

Further Reading

Guiheux, Alain, Olivier Cinqualbre, and Nicole Toutcheff (editors), Paris: Centre
Georges Pompidou, 1989
Jullian, René, Paris: Sers, 1989
Mariani, Riccardo (editor), New York: Rizzoli, 1990
Pawlowski, Krzysztof Kazimierz, Paris: Centre de Recherche d’Urbanisme, 1967
Wiebenson, Dora, London: Studio Vista, and New York: Braziller, 1969

CITTA NUOVA (1914)

On 20 May 1914 Antonio Sant’Elia from Italy and Mario Chiattone from Switzerland,
two young architects in the Italian avant-garde movement Il Nuovo Tendenze, exhibited
drawings that illustrated fragments of a new urban metropolis. Chiattone’s contribution,
entitled “Structures of a Modern Metropolis,” included several fine renditions of high-rise
apartment buildings that presaged later developments in the 1920s and 1930s, but they
were overshadowed by Sant’ Elia’s collection of drawings, entitled (The New City), his
vision of Milan in the year 2000. These drawings were accompanied in the exhibition
catalog by a written text, a (or manifesto) on the problems of modern architecture,
bearing Sant’Elia’s name only. This polemical essay reappeared in a reworked form
several weeks later, on 11 July 1914, as (Futurist Architecture), still authored by
Sant’Elia, but bearing the unmistakable stamp of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, the
mouthpiece of Italian futurism.

Dispute still lingers over the precise relationship of Sant’Elia to Marinetti and to the
futurist movement in general. Most critics agree that Sant’Elia was primarily a socialist
who joined Marinetti’s movement without much enthusiasm on account of its
increasingly outspoken nationalist character, at odds with the more internationalist views
of socialist thought at that time. But there is little doubt that Sant’Elia’s vision of the new
city, an urban environment infatuated with the awesome potential of mechanistic form, is
futurist in concept, even if not specifically created under that banner.

Antonio Sant’Elia was born in Como, in northern Italy, in 1880. He studied
architecture in Milan and later in Bologna, where he graduated at the age of 24. His
studies were interrupted by a period of apprenticeship with the Villoressi Canal Company
and some time spent in the works department of the commune of Milan. On his return to
Milan from Bologna in 1912, Sant’ Elia was in touch with the polemical futurist group
under Marinetti’s provocative leadership and clearly had sympathy with several of their
aesthetic aims having to do with the dynamism and mechanized setting of futurist life in a
truly modern metropolis.

The eleventh proposition of the original Futurist Manifesto, published by
Marinetti in 1909, praises “the midnight fervor of arsenals and shipyards
blazing with electric moons; insatiable stations swallowing the smoking

serpents of their trains; factories hung from clouds by the twisted threads

of their smoke; [and]

——
.
re
sat

anneaie Saar’ Ed

ee ee

Antonio Sant’Elia, first page of the
original pamphlet edition of the
manifesto (Futurist Architecture)

© Marsilio, Venice, Italy. Photo
courtesy Ross Jenner

bridges flashing like knives in the sun, giant gymnasts that leap over rivers.”

This passage could serve as a preface for Sant’Elia’s vision, and in a series (possibly
hundreds) of provocative sketches made in 1912, 1913, and 1914, Sant’Elia sought to
translate the spirit and content of mechanical innovations into architectural and urban
form. Tall sculpted shapes define a city of rapid travel and technical purity, forms that
owed much to the artifacts of the new industrial society such as power stations—an icon
of Marinetti’s futurist vocabulary—and engineering structures such as great dams. One of
the most famous drawings, (1914)—a study for the more finished version in
exhibition—illustrates a railway station shaped like a huge dam. Trains vanish beneath
the great, sloping mass, raked by escalators and flanked by symmetrical towers, whereas
to the rear an aircraft landing strip vanishes into the distance between clifflike slabs of
buildings—a particularly dangerous transport interchange that reappeared in Le
Corbusier’s drawings a decade and more later.

Several lines in Sant’Elia’s manifesto that accompanied his drawings at
the 1914 exhibition echo the sentiments and wording of the Futurist
Manifesto closely, but the text, put together by a colleague, Ugo Nebbia,
from Sant’Elia’s own words, indicates that the architect was quite capable
of formulating futurist

Antonio Sant’Elia, plane and train
station, with funiculars and elevators
on three traffic levels; ink and pencil
on tracing paper

© Musei Civici, Como, Italy. Photo
courtesy Ross Jenner

polemics and visions without any direct help (or interference) from Marinetti. Sant’Elia’s
words marry with his images to create a future world in which architects “must invent
and rebuild our Modern city like an immense and tumultuous shipyard. ...Elevators
must no longer hide away like solitary worms in the stairwells...but must swarm up the
facades like serpents of glass and iron.”

In none of the drawings and sketches are conventional streets or buildings indicated.
There is no indication of traditional urban structure. Instead, Sant’Elia depicts the city as
a megastructure of connected building masses and multilevel movement systems,
presaging the fascination with urban megastructures during the 1960s and 1970s. In this
aspect his vision of the future city differs sharply from that of Tony Garnier, whose of
1901-04, although relying on hydroelectric power and containing large industria
buildings and a modern train station, still contains residential areas comprising streets of
neat homes surrounded by greenery. In Sant’Elia’s vision, such residential quarters are
superseded by stacked apartment houses, their stepped profiles lined with terraces and
accessed by elevator towers and flying bridges.
It is not clear whether was to replace the existing city fabric of Milan completely.
However, in accordance with futurist principles that placed emphasis on the continua.
rein-vention and rebuilding of the city, it is evident that by drawing a completely new
urban world, Sant’Elia did want to inspire people to supplant existing cities. This cleared
site approach was emphasized again in Le Corbusier’s 1925 for central Paris and was to
come true with many devastating consequences in American and European cities during
the urban renewal period of the 1950s and 1960s.

With the wisdom of hindsight, it is easy to blame Sant’Elia’s visions for some of the
negative physical and social outcomes of this radical demolition approach that are evident
to architects and planners at the end of the 20th century. But these visions were born of
their time, and the world of fin-de-siécle Europe was vastly different; there was a
growing sense, especially in Italy (only recently unified in 1861), that the old age was
passing and a new one beginning, politically and in terms of technology.

For most of the 19th century, new technologies had little impact on the appearance of
Italian cities, but the last quarter of the century saw massive changes, especially in the
northern cities of Milan and Turin. These cities became major industrial centers in which
new building types—train stations, large factories, and power stations—jostled side by
side with older buildings. Electric lighting came to city buildings and streets, and these
same thoroughfares became clogged with traffic and the new electric trams. This
transformation of Milan—the home base of Marinetti and the futurists—from an Old
World princely capital to an industrial metropolis galvanized futurist thought. Clearly the
new world would not fit into the antiquated Renaissance palaces of Italian history; the
young nation of Italy, with new technological power and potential, needed a
correspondingly modern urban environment in which to flourish. But before this
contemporary city could arise, Sant’Elia theorized, Italy had to be shaken from its
architectural slumber and cast off the burden of its classical past and deadening
architectural conventions.

This new urban world, created with an architecture of engineering directness and bold
sculptural form, is illustrated precisely in Sant’Elia’s drawings for . His forms, surfaces,
and spaces destroyed the traditions and styles of classicism and historical eclecticism.
Sant’Elia reworked several of his earlier sketches, transforming them from fluid
Expressionist compositions to finely wrought illustrations, drafted with exquisite care and
precision. Using black ink and black (occasionally blue-black) pencil on paper and
tracing paper, Sant’Elia transmuted the flowing romantic images of his preparatory
drawings into hard-edged perspectives that transcended other visualizations of the future
metropolis. When compared with contemporary illustrations of future New York by


R.Rummel (1911) and H.Wiley Corbett (1913), which comprise large, lumpen buildings
and bridges clothed in standard historicist details, Sant’ Elia presented an architecture of
stark and flashing profile, developed with convincing engineering details that pushed new
materials and technologies to their limits.

For the Nuovo Tendenze exhibition Sant’Elia selected 16 drawings comprising the
Airplane and Train Station; the Casa Nuova apartment building and four other high-rise
apartment buildings (referred to as “terraced houses”) incorporating external elevators
and sited adjacent to multilevel roadways; three power stations; a bridge; and six other
detail or preparatory sketches. Taken together, these thoroughly worked out illustrations
provided the most heroic and poetic conception of all the Utopian visions of the 20th-
century city. Compared to the polite, well-mannered comprehensiveness of Garnier’s
the rationalist bombast of Le Corbusier’s (1925), or the idiosyncratic prairie aesthetic of
Frank Lloyd Wright’s Broadacre City (1934-35), Sant’Elia’s imagination depicts, in a
marvelous pictorial synthesis, a city infatuated with the majestic and liberating potential
of the machine. Sant’Elia’s tragic, if heroic, death at the battle of Monfalcone, on 10
October 1916, denied the world a more developed examination of this urban potential.
The futurist architecture of died with its precocious young author.

DAVID WALTERS
Broadacre City (1934-35); Cité Industrielle, Une; Futurism; Sant’Elia,

Antonio (Italy); Voisin Plan for Paris

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, London: Architectural Press, and New York: Praeger, 1960
Caramel, Luciano, and Alberto Longatti, Milan: Mondadori, 1987; New York:
Rizzoli, 1988

Ulrich, Conrad (compiler), Giitersloh, Germany: Bertelsmann, 1964; as
translated by Michael Bullock, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, and London: Lund
Humphries, 1970

CITY BEAUTIFUL MOVEMENT

Begun in the United States in the late 19th century, the City Beautiful movement enjoyed
a relatively brief reign, fading into obscurity during the New Deal and the rise of
modernism. City Beautiful architects and planners sought to bring elements of city
planning, architecture, and landscape architecture into a harmonious unity. It aspired to
many of the principles of baroque or neoclassical city design, which had transformed the
medieval cores of European cities such as Rome from the reign of Pope Sixtus V in the

late 16th century to Paris under the prefecture of Baron Georges Eugene Haussmann in
the mid19th century. Equally embedded in City Beautiful was a celebration of
neoclassical architecture, transplanted to American soil by architects loyal to the aesthetic
principles promoted by the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris.

Although its intellectual seeds were sown by a handful of 19th-century figures, such as
landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted and city planner Charles Mulford Robinson,
the possibilities of the City Beautiful ideal were most dramatically portrayed at the
World’s Columbian Exposition, opening in Chicago in 1893. With Daniel H.Burnham in
charge of the overall design and construction process, highly regarded architects such as
Van Brunt and Howe; McKim, Mead and White; Peabody and Stearns; Adler and
Sullivan; Burling and Whitehouse; Jenny and Mundie; and Henry Ives Cobb contributed
designs for individual buildings and features. Rendered in a special type of plaster, their
work resulted in magnificent exhibition halls designed in classical Greco-Roman and
Renaissance architectural styles. Olmsted’s landscaping talents infused the site plan of
the fair and included a lagoon, canals, ceremonial plazas, promenades, gardens,
fountains, and statuary. By the fair’s end well over 20 million people had visited and
retumed to their home cities and countries around the world with an idealized vision of
the future city. This idealized view characterized the City Beautiful movement wherever
it was pursued, in small town and large city alike.

At its heart City Beautiful was less an aesthetic ideal and more fundamentally a
concept that at that time was largely alien in North America, namely, that cities should
result not from random and cumulative decisions by individual architects and builders but
from a holistically conceived and visually coherent plan that prescribes siting, scale, and
other design principles in a rational and balanced ensemble. A bold idea, to be sure, City
Beautiful arose in the context of the reformist fervor that sought to transform politics,
government, and social policy in the late 19th and early 20th centuries within an orderly
and humanly scaled urban setting combining nature and planning.

Eight years after the exposition’s close, the nation’s capital became the first U.S. city
to seriously pursue City Beautiful principles. As consultants to the McMillan
Commission, Burnham, Olmsted, Charles F. McKim, and Augustus St. Gaudens sought to
restore the essence of Washington’s original 1792 plan as prepared by Pierre Charles
L’Enfant and refined by Andrew Ellicott. The plan resulted in the removal of railroad
tracks, a polluted creek, and several buildings from the Mall. The Mall was relandscaped
in the tradition of French formalism. Building heights and massing were carefully
limited, and structures were sited so as to enclose the Mall in a balanced and harmonious
composition. Although many details have been altered, the 20th-century redevelopment
of the Mall and environs in central Washington has more or less embraced the spirit of
the McMillan Commission plan.

Several other communities followed suit. For example, Virgil G.Bogue’s plan for
Seattle (1911) and Edward H.Bennett’s plans for Minneapolis (1917) and Denver (1917)
also promoted City Beautiful ideals. However, for sheer aspirations and comprehensive
vision of present and future conditions, the 1909 plan of Chicago knew no equal in terms
of boldness and departure from the city’s 19th-century status quo. Written by Burnham
and Bennett, the plan prescribed a great civic center plaza in the downtown, framed by
federal and state buildings and a new city hall; a lakefront park, its symmetrical jetties
embracing a view corridor westward to the civic center; broad boulevards and diagonal


avenues intersecting at magnificent circles and squares containing obelisks, columns,
fountains, and decorative focal features; and carefully proportioned buildings built to
uniform cornice heights. Today, in the city of skyscrapers and gridded streets, Grant
Park, Wacker Drive, Michigan Avenue, and the city’s associated cultural institutions and
sprawling park system echo the grandiose utterances found in the plan.

Beyond Chicago, fragments of City Beautiful plans appeared in other
cities. Burnham’s modified plan for San Francisco resulted in construction
of a civic center embraced by the domed neoclassical City Hall (1915),
library (1916), courthouse (1926), and other civic and government
edifices. Burnham, John M. Carrére, and Arnold W.Brunner prepared
Cleveland’s Group Plan (1903), which ultimately led to construction of
that city’s civic center, the Mall. Arrayed on its perimeter are a federal

Cleveland Group Plan (1903), designed by Daniel Burnham, John
M.Carrére, and Arnold W.Brunner. View of central and north sections of
the Mall.

© Dennis Gale

building (1910), courthouse (1911), city hall (1916), auditorium (1922), library (1925),
Board of Education building (1930), and county building (1957). Civic center plazas or
malls were added to Indianapolis, Denver, and St. Louis, all in the early 20th century.

Other cities appropriated other City Beautiful conventions. Philadelphia’s Benjamin
Franklin Parkway (1919) is a grand avenue cutting diagonally through the city’s grid
system to visually link City Hall to the Philadelphia Museum of Art. Between them lie a
grand circle and an oval providing open space for landscaping, statuary, and other
decorative features. City Beautiful plans found reality in many state capitals, including
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania; Austin, Texas; and Augusta, Maine. In these cities and others,
carefully organized vistas, elevated public buildings, ceremonial boulevards, formalistic
landscaping, and near uniform building heights bespeak the legacy of Burnham, Bennett,
Olmsted, and others.

An irony of the City Beautiful movement was the fact that it emerged in opposition to
the real American industrial city of the Gilded Age. Embedded in the times was a
struggle among architects, landscape architects, engineers, artists, and civic leaders over
the direction and meaning of the fledgling city-planning profession. Many sought to
emphasize the functional elements of city planning, including efficiency, economy,
safety, and reform of social conditions. Others insisted that the aesthetic and cultural
attributes of European baroque ideals and neoclassical architecture would inspire civic
pride, respect for democratic values, and cultural growth among citizens and visitors to
American cities. With more than a century behind it, the City Beautiful legacy remains in
American history a celebration of order, balance, symmetry, axiality, monumentality, and
restraint.

DENNIS E.GALE
Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); McKim, Mead and White (United
States); Mumford, Lewis (United States); Parkways; Philadelphia (PA),

United States; Plan of Chicago; Urban Planning

Further Reading

One of the most authoritative texts is Wilson’s which examines the work of Burnham,
Bennett, and others in several U.S. cities. A respected source on the World’s Columbian
Exposition is Burg’s —_. To place City Beautiful in the larger evolution of city planning
history, Scott’s is an excellent departure point. For a less sympathetic treatment of
the movement, Lewis Mumford’s (chapter 6, “The Imperial Facade’) will command
the reader’s attention.
Burg, David F., Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1976
Burnham, Daniel H., and Edward H.Bennett, edited by Charles Moore, Chicago: The
Commercial Club of Chicago, 1909; reprint, New York: Princeton Architectural Press,
993
Gutheim, Frederick, and Wilcomb E.Washburn, (exhib. cat.), Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1976
Hines, Thomas S., New York: Oxford University Press, 1974
Issel, William, and Robert W.Cherny, Berkeley: University of California Press,
986


Kahn, Judd, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1979
Mumford, Lewis, New York: Boni and Liveright, 1924; reprint, New York:
Dover, 1955
Scott, Mel, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969
Wilson, William H., Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989

CITY HALL

The city hall is an ancient building type, its origins found at least as far back as the
classical Greek the assembly chamber of the city-state. In medieval Europe the city hall
took on a number of auxiliary spaces that complemented the council chamber, such as
market halls, office spaces, and social rooms. Some, such as the Palazzo Pubblico in
Siena or the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, celebrated the corporate identity of the
independent city with soaring towers and instructive works of art. As cities grew in size
and administrative complexity, their city halls grew ever larger and assumed a
prominence in the urban form of their cities that rivaled only the greatest sacred edifices.
By the end of the 19th century, enormous piles, such as Alfred Waterhouse’s Manchester
Town Hall (1867-77) and John McArthur’s Philadelphia City Hall (1871-1901), marked
the seats of municipal authority with complex historical allusions and equally convoluted
silhouettes.

At the beginning of the 20th century, it was unquestioned that a building typology as
representational as a city hall would be expressed in a historical style. In northern Europe
this historicism often meant an investigation of medieval forms, as the type was closely
associated with its medieval antecedents and the National Romantic movement. Martin
Nyrop’s Copenhagen Town Hall (1892-1905) was the most significant example of the
northern European city hall and a primary inspiration for Ragnar Ostberg’s Stockholm
City Hall (1911-23), which fused medieval and Renaissance detailing with an extensive
art program. In more southern nations, Renaissance and baroque models were often
emulated. Contemporaneous city halls in the United Kingdom often interpreted the
baroque. A.Brumwell Thomas appropriated Wren’s vocabulary at St. Paul’s to create his
grand but rather literal Belfast City Hall (1897-1906), and John Belcher’s Colchester
City Hall (1897-1902) did much to establish the English “free baroque.” Across the
English Channel, the influential French architect and theorist Victor Laloux built several
city halls modeled on those of the 17th century; his (1898-1900) at Tours inspired
several interpretations across the Atlantic.

In the United States many cities had built their city halls in the 1880s and 1890s, when
the Richardsonian Romanesque style suited the desirable images of permanence and
monumentality. Later, the civic improvement movement known as the City Beautiful
encouraged many cities to build new city halls as the centerpiece of a multistructure civic
center modeled on the “White City” of the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893 in
Chicago. The most complete and successful of these efforts was built after the great
earthquake and fire of San Francisco (1906); Bakewell and Brown’s City Hall (1912-16)
dominates the 15-block Civic Center with a 300-foot-high dome sometimes described as

a Doric fusion of those of Hardouin-Mansart and Michelangelo. The skyscraper as city
hall was first executed across the bay in Oakland, California, where Palmer and
Hornbostel won a competition with a 14-story tower in 1911. The skyscraper idiom
became more common in the 1920s and is best exemplified by Austin, Martin and
Parkinson’s Los Angeles City Hall, a severe classical tower, and G.Lloyd Preacher’s
Gothic skyscraper Atlanta City Hall (1928-30); Art Deco forms dominated the 1930s—
Dietel and Wade and Sullivan Jones’ Buffalo City Hall remains an important American
example of this international movement. In some locales regionally important revival
styles were employed to reinforce the city’s past or to promote an idealized fictive past;
Bakewell and Brown’s Pasadena City Hall (1923-27) was an amalgamation of
Mediterranean sources intended to evoke a Spanish heritage that the community did not
actually possess.

The emergence of the Modern movement in Europe in the 1910s and 1920s was not
often evidenced in city halls, largely because few new city hall projects were initiated
between the wars and because the political nature of the type nearly precluded
experimental form. Several notable exceptions were built. Willem Dudock’s Town Hal
(1924-30) for Hilversum, the Netherlands, is well known. Dudock contrasted several
austere horizontal masses, including a primary volume containing the council chamber,
with a soaring tower. Each mass interlocked with several others and yet remained
distinctly legible, the assembly presenting a balanced composition in repose. Fritz
Hoéger’s Town Hall (1928-30) for Rtistringen, Germany, exemplified his interest in
dramatic geometric form within the limitations of brick masonry; the ceremonial entry
and council chamber are marked by an enormous |2-story tower, a pure solid broken
only by a series of vertical fins and a clock tower on the primary elevation.

After World War II a large number of city centers in Europe required complete
rebuilding. Naturally enough, in many places city halls were repaired or even
reconstructed in order to preserve a continuity with prewar civic life. Some cities,
particularly in Germany, adapted surviving structures to a new civic purpose, with the
intention to build a representational structure at some time in the future. Most of the
continent’s new city halls were modern in orientation. Perhaps the most famous are those
by Alvar Aalto, whose civic complexes for Saynatsalo (1950-52) and Seinajéki (1952—
66) wove the town hall and auxiliary build-ings into the landscape and demonstrated as
much concern for the space between the buildings as for the buildings themselves. At
Seinaj6ki the city hall is marked by its axial siting within the civic center and by a
commanding monitor roof through which light pours into the council chamber.
American postwar city halls came in two forms: the unassuming suburban
multipurpose civic building, which usually was designed on a decidedly
domestic scale, and the overscaled, inner-city modernist monument, which
usually served as the centerpiece of a large urban-renewal scheme. The
former conception, city hall as ranch house or colonial farmstead,
successfully served those residential communities that lacked a
commercial center or a long civic tradition. The success of the second
movement, the city hall as civic savior, has proven more troublesome, if

only because so much more was at stake. Perhaps definitive of this latter


form, Kallmann, McKinnell and Knowles’ Boston City Hall (1963-69)
commands its cleared plaza and the 18th- and early 19th-century harbor
below it like a citadel. Although one can read the jumble of fenestration on
the harbor elevation for a clue as to the location of the mayor’s suite and
the council chambers, much of the public’s interaction with its municipal
government is forced underground into several floors of bureaucratic
offices below grade. This loss of dignified purpose continued into the late
20th century, in which many newer Sunbelt cities constructed city halls
and civic campuses indistin-

Stadshuset (Stockholm City Hall), designed by Ragnar Ostberg (191 1-
23)
© Macduff Everton/CORBIS

guishable from the suburban business parks and hotel slabs that surround them.

At the end of the 20th century, the city hall regained its significance in architectural
discourse, although not without some concern about the overwhelming scale that the
modern city hall often possesses. Richard Meier’s city halls restored the type to the center
of urban life, but they did so without comment on the local architectural dialect. In The
Hague (1987-95), Meier organized three colossal slabs of office space about an equally
enormous atrium, creating within the city hall a public realm that functions independently
of the often damp Dutch climate. One corner of the complex is punctuated by the
cylindrical mass of the public library, a form that is repeated within the atrium at the
council chamber; both are subordinated to the experience of the atrium, whose precise
detail and sublime scale transport the viewer beyond the day-to-day life of the city.

Scale is again of paramount importance with Kenzo Tange’s City Hall (1989-95) for
Tokyo. This complex, spread over three blocks of the Shinjuku subcenter, is composed of

two tower groups and an assembly building linked to the towers by skywalks. The
axiality and geometric rigor of the plan recall the Beaux-Arts conceptions of the
beginning of the century, even as the elevations refer to both traditional Japanese post-
and-beam construction and modern integrated circuit boards. The orthogonal grids set up
by the office tower blocks are complemented by the radial framework of the assembly
building, whose sweeping hemicycle embraces a fan-shaped court reminiscent of the
Piazza del Campo in Siena. The elliptical assembly hall is situated on axis to this court,
elevated to the seventh floor, and in fact breaks the plane of the hemicycle to announce
its presence. In his design Tange provides both a usable public space and an identifiable
seat of authority (the council chamber) within a comprehensible assembly of office
towers and stratified circulation. This synthesis of Western and native traditions
represents a culmination of the typology in the 20th century and might serve as a worthy
starting point for the city halls of the next.

JEFFREY THOMAS TILMAN

Aalto, Alvar (Finland); City Beautiful Movement; Dudok, Willem

Marinus (Netherlands); Meier, Richard (United States)

Further Reading

Cornell, Elias, Stockholm: Byggforlaget, 1992
Cramer, Max, Hans van Grieken, and Heleen Pronk, Amsterdam: Van Gennep, 1981
Draper, Joan Elaine, “The San Francisco Civic Center: Architecture, Planning, and
Politics,” Ph.D. diss., University of California at Berkeley, 1979
Feddes, Fred, et al., Rotterdam: NAi, and The Hague: Gemeente, 1995
Gutheim, Frederick Albert, New York: Braziller, and London: Mayflower, 1960
Hales, George P., Los Angeles: Board of Public Works, 1928
“Koolhaas and OMA Win The Hague City Hall Competition,” (April 1987)
Lebovich, William L., | Washington, D.C.: Preservation Press, 1984
“The New Tokyo City Hall Complex,” 3 (Summer 1991)
Ostberg, Ragnar, Stockholm: Norstedt, 1929;as | Stockholm: Norstedt, 1929
“Richard Meier: City Hall and Central Library,” 46 (1996)
Service, Alastair, New York and Toronto: Oxford University Press, and London:
Thames and Hudson, 1977
Wilson, Richard Guy, “California Classicist,’ | (December 1983)

CIUDAD UNIVERSITARIA CAMPUS AND
STADIUM

Mexico City, Mexico
The Mexican National University, founded in 1553 by order of the Spanish emperor
Charles V, is the oldest university on the American continent. Institutes and colleges of

the National University were located in the historical center of Mexico City, but in the
1940s, the structural problems of organizing the increasing academic activities led
Mexican politicians to commission plans for a new campus in the southern periphery of
the city. Inspired by Madrid’s university city of 1927 and by the tradition in the United
States of suburban campus and university planning, the Mexican planners designated a
seven-million-square-meter site of lava landscape at the Pedregal de San Angel for the
university city. In 1953, four centuries after its foundation, the entire National University
moved to Ciudad Universitaria.

The project of constructing a university city following conteny
and architecture standards had high symbolic importance for the
under President Miguel Aleman. Oil-exporting developing count
Venezuela, and Iraq, hoped to make their economic progress vis:

porary urban planning
Mexican government
ries, such as Mexico,
ible by building huge

modern architectural projects for education. Although spatially different, the Mexican

university city shared political and architectural aims with Car!

os Rail Villanueva’s

master plan of 1950 for the University City in Caracas and provided the model for Walter
Gropius’s and The Architects Collaborative’s (TAC’s) design for the New University of
Baghdad, Iraq, in 1958.

The first urban plan for Ciudad Universitaria of 1946, by the architects Mario Pani and
Enrique del Moral, characterized by axial Beaux-Arts structures, was soon revised
because of the effect of the modern spatial concept of the UN headquarters in New York
and also because of pressure from architecture students around Teodoro Gonzalez de
Leén. Together with José Luis Cuveas, a student of the former Bauhaus director and
emigrant Hannes Meyer, Pani and del Moral in 1949 presented the definitive urban
structure of Ciudad Universitaria. In a campus of 180 to 360 meters, the university
buildings were placed like isolated monuments in open spaces. In the southern zone, the
architects set sports and leisure installations, and west of the campus, separated by the
north-south axis of the broad In-surgentes Avenue, the stadium. Curved internal roads, an
idea of the Austrian-born architect Hermann Herrey, contrasted with the rectangular
structures of campus buildings and opened magnificent views to the lava-stone landscape.
Contemporary critics emphasized that this concept for the Ciudad Universitaria subtly
interpreted the topographic conditions, such as various levels of lava stones and site-
specific vegetation. The grand open campus space, marked by huge horizontal and
vertical building volumes, reminded archaeologists of pre-Hispanic urban patterns.

Under the direction of the architect Carlos Lazo, a group of 150 Mexican architects,
most of them alumni or students, elaborated the designs for the 30 university buildings.
The outstanding buildings—Rectoria for the university’s president and the central
library—dominate the campus. Their cubic forms and vertical orientation contrast with
the low-rise buildings for the faculties of philosophy and architecture. At the eastern edge
of the central green campus, the tower of sciences marks the beginning of another
subdivision, for the faculties of medicine, chemistry, and law. The smallest building on
campus, the Pavilion of Cosmic Rays, was regarded as architecturally the most
interesting. Here, in 1951, Felix Candela with Jorge Gonzalez Reyna constructed his first
shell building, which brought Mexico to the attention of international architecture
magazines.

One of the principal intentions of modern Mexican architects at that time was to
integrate artworks with the buildings to imbue International Style forms with national or


local icono-graphic elements. Juan O’Gorman’s Central Library shows all the
contradictory aspects of this “integracion plastica.” The cubic high-rise is covered with a
mosaic containing different worldviews and scientific concepts, graphically expressed in
the manner of pre-Hispanic codices. The library’s facades serve as huge canvases but do
not integrate art and architecture. Other campus buildings show applied murals or
ornaments, as in David Alfaro Siqueiros’ relief mural at the Rectoria.

The most outstanding example of artistic intervention and structural integration into
the landscape is the University Stadium, used for the 1968 Olympics. Its conical, oval
form rises out of the surrounding lava rocks. Exterior walls are covered with rough, gray
lava stones, yielding at the central entrance to an unfinished mural by Diego Rivera
showing the development of sports from pre-Hispanic to moder times. For its
combination of dynamic forms and archaic material, the University Stadium was admired
worldwide as a model for site-specific entertainment architecture.

The Ciudad Universitaria and stadium complex forms claim a landmark of
international standing. Together with the neighboring luxurious Pedregal housing
development by Luis Barragan and Max Cetto, the Ciudad Universitaria adds ecological
and topographical aspects to the modern urban concept of open spaces. The immense
urban growth of Mexico City has, however, affected the Ciudad Universitaria. Originally
planned for a community of 25,000 students and academics, the campus serves about
300,000, reflecting the increasing population of Mexico City (3.5 million in the 1950s,
probably 20 million in 2000). New university satellites were planned in the 1970s and
1980s, among them the cultural center at the southern edge of Ciudad Universitaria.
There, the National Library in raw concrete and the research institutes in modular
functionalist forms are located between an open forum for contemporary sculpture and an
ecological reserve. The circular Espacio Escultorio, which reveals the geologic origins of
the site, was designed in 1978 by a group of Mexican artists under the direction of
Mathias Goeritz.

Despite all intentions to decentralize higher education in Mexico, Ciudad
Universitaria, with its dense concentration of science and culture, is still attractive and
therefore exceeds its intended capacity. Uncontrolled urban growth endangers the
generous open and green spaces of Ciudad Universitaria. The agenda for the 21st century
will require protection of its urban, architectural, and artistic concept not only as a
landmark but also as a lively space and as ecological compensation for the megalopolis.

PETER KRIEGER
Barragan, Luis (Mexico); Candela, Felix (Mexico); Meyer, Hannes
(Germany); Mexico City, Mexico; O’Gorman, Juan (Mexico); Villanueva,
Carlos Ratil (Venezuela)

Further Reading

Myers gives a contemporary perspective, as does Hitchcock. Detailed lists of architects
and artists are in the architectural guide by Noelle and Tejeda. The official publication of
the faculty of architecture (Sarukhan) contains a good collection of essays, photographs,
and plans.

Burian, Edward R. (editor), Austin: University of Texas Press, 1997

Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955
Myers, Irving Evan, New York: Architectural Book, 1952

Noelle, Louise, and Carlos Tejeda, Mexico City: Fomento Cultural Banamex,
1993

Sarukhan, José, et al., Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Aut6noma de Mexico,
1994

CIUDAD UNIVERSITARIA

Designed by Carlos Raul Villanueva, completed 1977 Caracas, Venezuela

The Ciudad Universitaria of Caracas (City University of Caracas, also known as the
Universidad Central de Venezuela [UCV] or Central University of Venezuela), designed
by the Venezuelan architect Carlos Ratl Villanueva, is regarded as the country’s most
important example of modernist architecture. Derived from Le Corbusier’s works, the
campus plan’s Venezuelaninflected organicism set a new standard for Venezuelan
architects. The “synthesis of the arts” it proposed has never been surpassed. Despite the
dilemma its association with the military government of General Marcos Pérez Jiménez
(1948-58) presented for artists working on the project, its success with both Venezuelan
elites and the international architectural community significantly influenced the course of
Venezuelan architecture.

Villanueva’s initial conception of the campus plan as well as early building designs
make use of monumental axes and symmetrical disposition of masses—elements that
betray his Beaux-Arts education. The University Hospital (1943), designed in the first
phase of construction from 1944 to 1949, demonstrates this traditional approach.
Villanueva modified the hospital’s facade later in an attempt to integrate it with the rest
of the campus; in subsequent stages of the design, both individual buildings and the
overall plan become more flexible and organic. For example, in the second phase of
construction (1950-52), Villanueva made the transition to a full-fledged modernism in
the Olympic Stadium (1950). Recalling the Mexican architect Felix Candela’s
experiments in reinforced concrete, the oval grandstand of the stadium resembles the
prow ofa great ship; sustained by barely visible columns, its bulk seems to defy gravity.
Strong contrasts of tropical light and shadow play important roles in this and later
structures, and the architect’s use of reinforced concrete to mold forms reappears as well.

The necessity for covered spaces and walkways because of the tropical climate
became a source of invention for Villanueva at the UCV. Citing the need to shelter
students from the wind, rain, and sun, he covered the 1428-meter-long sidewalk that links
various zones of the campus with a canopy of reinforced concrete, supported by columns,
that appears to float above the ground. The covered sidewalk also acts as an orienting
path through the free-form ground plan of the campus and terminates in the physical and
spiritual center of the university, the Plaza Cubierta (Covered Plaza).

The Aula Magna (Amphitheater) and the Covered Plaza (third phase of construction,
1952-53) that surrounds it best embody the architect’s principles of the synthesis of the
arts, as well as his attempt to create an “outdoor museum” by integrating artworks and

structures with the landscape. The Covered Plaza, an enormous roof of reinforced
concrete, creates heavily shaded areas punctuated by light effects produced by walls
cast in different patterns. Sculpture by Europeans Henri Laurens and Jean Arp, murals in
materials as diverse as ceramic, mosaic, aluminum, stone, bronze, and glass by Fernand
Léger, Antoine Pevsner, Victor Vasarely, and Venezuelans Mateo Manaure, Pascual
Navarro, and Carlos Gonzalez Bogen, among others, punctuate the space and are grouped
so as to create smaller irregularly shaped areas under the canopy and just outside it. Many
of these works make use of strong, saturated colors, which are set off by a backdrop of
tropical foliage and bright sky.

Seen from above, the Aula Magna’s cone-shaped auditorium is emphasized by
repeating wing-shaped sections rising from the roofline in two tiers. The reference to
flight on the exterior is manifested more explicitly in the interior, specifically in the
acoustic panels designed by U.S. sculptor Alexander Calder, which he called Platillos
Voladores or Nubes Acisticas (Flying Saucers or Acoustic Clouds, 1953). Huge, rounded
shapes in various colors, attached to walls and ceilings, appear to float over the fixed
auditorium seats. Critics cite the resulting marriage of form and function as the sole
instance in which Villanueva achieved a synthesis of the arts at the university.

The School of Odontology (1957), from the fourth stage of construction (1954-58),
demonstrates an important step in the evolution of Villanueva’s designs for the campus.
Citing the library at the Ciudad Universitaria in Mexico City as failing to integrate art and
architecture because Mexican artist Juan O’Gorman’s murals were figurative in style and,
thus, mere decoration, Villanueva made use of polychromatic facades on the exterior of
this building (Policromia, by Omar Carrefio). He also commissioned Alejandro Otero and
Oswaldo Vigas, among other artists, to design abstract murals in paint and mosaic for the
exteriors of other buildings.

Constructed during the petroleum boom of the 1950s and supported by a military
regime committed to renovating the capital city, the UCV played an important role in
advertising the success of the dictatorship in achieving its goals of order and progress.
Heralded in the Venezuelan press to this day as the jewel of Venezuelan architecture,
through the years its significance as an architectural site has superseded its original
political associations. Periodic calls are made in the press for its restoration, as its
buildings and artworks have suffered significant deterioration and misuse. Built for four
to five thousand students, the university today has an enrollment of over 50,000 and
covers an area of 204 hectares, or 504 acres.

The UCV’s influence on Venezuelan architecture, perhaps because of its audacity and
scope, has been diffuse. Its celebration of the Venezuelan landscape through the lens of
European modernism spawned no imitators, but it did legitimate modernism as a valid
style for public architecture. In addition, a major consequence of Villanueva’s synthesis
of the arts has been the proliferation of public art projects throughout the city: large-scale
art dominates the urban experience in Caracas. Freestanding sculptures and wall murals
in subway stations, alongside highways, in plaza centers, and in buildings transform the
city into a living exemplar of Villanueva’s “outdoor museum.”

International critics frequently compare Villanueva’s UCV with Le Corbusier’s
designs for Chandigarh and Lucio Costa’s for Brasilia, because of these projects’
similarities of scope and intention, but Villanueva’s style is regarded as less fully
realized. As one of the few extant examples of large-scale modernist experiments carried


to fruition outside Europe, however, the UCV continues to be of interest to the
international architectural community.
MARGUERITE K.MAYHALL
Brasilia, Brazil; Candela, Felix (Mexico); Chandigarh, India; Corbusier,
Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Costa, Lucio (Brazil);
Villanueva, Carlos Raul (Venezuela)

Further Reading

No monographs have been published in the United States on the Ciudad Universitaria,
and in Venezuela, the only recent book-length work deals with the works of art at the
university. For these reasons, more general, and somewhat more dated, texts are in many
cases the best available sources. The publications on Villanueva’s career, or on
Venezuelan architecture more generally, are the next best sources for information on and
illustrations of the university, but readers should be aware that Villanueva’s continuing
status in the country as Venezuela’s most revered architect precludes much critical
analysis of his work within its sociopolitical context. Interested readers can also consult
monographs on individual artists for more information.

Bullrich, Francisco, New York: Braziller, 1969

Damaz, Paul F., New York: Reinhold, 1963

Gasparini, Graziano, and Juan Pedro Posani, Caracas: Fundacion Fina Gomez, 1969
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955
Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl, New York: Praeger, and London: Tiranti, 1964

(exhib. cat.), Caracas: Museo de Arte Contemporaneo de Caracas, 1988
(bilingual Spanish-English edition), Caracas: Universidad Central de
Venezuela and Monte Avila Editores, 1991
Posani, Juan Pedro, Caracas: Lagoven, 1985
0 (1987)

CLASSICISM

In the 20th century architectural classicism continued in its centuries-old custom
(traditional classicism) and also was appropriated by those who abstracted its principles
in the modern effort for an ahistorical architecture (early modernism). Among those
extending the classical tradition, the terms and have been used as if interchangeable.
However, most would use as the more inclusive term referring to premodernist
architectural habits in various cultures and societies around the world. Many would
describe as including a more specific species of traditional architecture drawing from
the Western tradition of building.

The contrast in how traditional classicism was employed in the 20th century may be
witnessed in the work of architects as apparently dissimilar as Walter Gropius and Paul

Philippe Cret, both of whom utilized such fundamentals as bilateral symmetry, axes and
cross axes as organizing plan elements, and proportional systems based on
anthropomorphic sources. It would be of little consequence to identify as classical any
building employing axes of symmetry in an organizational strategy, yet classical
principles proved themselves useful throughout the century and to architects of every
aesthetic preference. Buildings whose elevations and massing are as different as the
Werkbund Pavilion (Cologne, 1914), First Church of Christ, Scientist (Berkeley, 1910),
and Rockefeller Center (New York, from 1931) share fundamentally classical planning
techniques of axes of symmetry disciplining complex building programs. After
midcentury a notable exponent was Louis Kahn, trained in the University of
Pennsylvania’s Beaux-Arts program. Kahn employed the general geometries of
classicism and axial organization, altering the classical ideals of ceremonial circulation
laid out on primary axes separating the levels of important spaces into his theory of
“servant” and “served” spaces, as seen in his 1963 Parliament Building at Dacca (in what
is now Bangladesh).

Overt classical allusions were present in surprising places early in the 20th century,
notably in the AEG Turbine Factory designed by Peter Behrens (Berlin, 1908), hailed for
its sleek curtain wall and exposed structure. However, the impression of the classical
temple is undeniable despite the obvious expression of the factory function, even if here
the triangular pediment is replaced by the polygonal profile of the building’s truss roof,
and the colonnade is a series of steel columns. Through this metaphor Behrens could
intentionally express that his era had elevated industrial tasks to the level of cultural
endeavor; he could not have communicated such in a newly invented vocabulary. Here,
classicism was essential for the meaning of this primary monument of the factory
aesthetic. More ingenious with its use of the “elements” of classicism, Gunnar Asplund’s
Stockholm Public Library (1920-28) is massed with a simple cylinder rising from a low
box, recalling at once the creative form play of neoclassical architect Ledoux and the
elementary volumes into which the Pantheon might be broken down. Drawing from more
specific classical lessons, Asplund applied ornament in its traditional civic role: Interior
bas-reliefs illustrate scenes from Homer; the exterior frieze portrays elements of everyday
life to enliven the building and to suggest the library’s contents and function as well. As
an important civic institution, the building’s cylinder makes a typal reference to those
buildings that have ranked high in the traditional hierarchy.

Critical attention has tended to favor modernist stylistic innovation over the
application of classical principles. Even so, the recognizable signs of ancient building
types and ornament—in particular the orders—were employed consistently by advocates
of architecture’s classical heritage through the 20th century. In the early part of the
century, the design methods of American Renaissance architects proved helpful in
lending an appropriately ceremonial appearance and organizational structure to complex
buildings serving the modernity of 20th-century life. Notably, the Pennsylvania Station
(McKim, Mead and White; New York, 1910) vividly recalled the Imperial Baths of
Rome as it also utilized Ecole des Beaux-Arts planning to skillfully organize the
movements of travelers on foot, in taxis, and on trains. Such landmarks as the New York
Public Library (Carrére and Hastings, 1911) and the Flatiron Building (Daniel Burnham,
1903) reveal classicism’s value for expressive potential as well as its ability to organize
large, complex buildings, whether they sprawl horizontally or soar vertically. Although

these examples reveal a rigorous adherence to elements of Western classicism, the
Viceroy’s House in New Delhi (Edwin Lutyens, 1915—24) fused Western antique forms
and proportional systems with Mogul emblems of authority to express the imperial
station of the British Raj, revealing the conviction among colonial powers and their
architects that the Western classical tradition could be adapted flexibly to other cultural
contexts.

Following World War I, especially in the 1930s, the formal expression of classicism
was changed, especially in the hands of architects and patrons who strove to articulate
imperial ambitions architecturally, in a manner that some have described as “stripped.”
Their simplified but recognizable classicism embraced the monumental scale, sense of
discipline, order, and bright whiteness associated with classical antiquity, but in a form
void of the delicate ornament and visual refinements popular earlier in the century. This
architecture has been roundly criticized for its appropriation by the Nazi party,
specifically in Albert Speer’s Zeppelinfeld (Nuremberg, 1936) and Gerdy Troost’s House
of German Art (Munich, 1934). Hitler’s expression of nationalist sentiments through
stripped classicism extended to his 1937 plan to reorder Berlin with long avenues, axes,
and monumental classical buildings (including a triumphal arch dedicated to the Fiihrer
and a domed pantheon of Nazi heroes) drawing from the plans for Haussmann’s Paris,
imperial Rome, and L’Enfant’s Washington. However, there is nothing inherently
malevolent in the style itself, which appeared through the 20th century in buildings
designed to represent the democratic capital of the United States, including the Pan-
American Union (Cret, 1910) and the National World War II Memorial (Friedrich St.
Florian, design competition 1998). The appeal of stripped classicism to a culturally
diverse audience is apparent in such a case as the generation of architects from China
who studied under Cret at the University of Pennsylvania and, on returning to their
homeland, practiced an architecture that fused Western classicism with traditional
Chinese methods. Thus several countries, from Italy and Germany to China and America,
shared an affinity for this simplified classicism, drawing from it the expressive power and
authority of ancient architecture, its usefulness to express values of civic decorum, and
the forward-looking nature of its contemporary patrons.

The more visually obvious manifestations of classicism typified by McKim and Cret
coincided with peaks in the publication of ancient and Renaissance treatises, whose
appearance at the start and conclusion of the century reveals a significant readership of
architects applying the lessons and details of these books in their buildings. Vitruvius’s
was continually published in the 20th century. Revealing its importance to architecture
worldwide, the treatise was brought out in Spanish, French, Italian, German, and Latin;
two notable English translations of Vitruvius mark either end of the century (1914 and
1999). Similarly, several versions of William Ware’s were published in the first decade
of the century, and two more appeared in its final decades. These publication events
correspond with the early flourishing of the classical tradition. Their interruption during
the century’s middle decades coincided with the apparent triumph of “orthodox,” or high
European, modernism, which by the 1960s was deemed by many as fundamental to the
failure of urban renewal and slum clearance schemes, construction of disastrous CIAM-
inspired public housing projects, and the demolition of historic structures (notably the
1963 destruction of the aforementioned Penn Station). As the architectural devastation
visited on cities gave impetus to both a growing backlash against ahistorical modernist


architecture and historic preservation initiatives, tradition and classicism emerged as
viable correctives to the disasters of the Modern movement. Concurrently, several works
of Renaissance theory appeared in the last four decades of the century: Alberti’s was
published in 1966 and translated in 1986; Palladio was retranslated in 1965 and again in
1997; and several of Serlio’s books were reprinted in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. In
1993 the Getty Center’s Texts and Documents series added the 17th-century by
Claude Perrault to its ambitious list of publications.

New theory drawing from the old also appeared in these later decades (notably Robert
Venturi’s 1966) and found a wide audience whose growing dissatisfaction with
modernism stimulated the rise of Postmodernism. In its approach to infuse classical
ornament with meaning relevant in an era of relativity, which has led to doublecoding,
Postmodernism at once acknowledges the importance and value of ornament and antique
forms in architecture, at times with the intentional hazard of weakening the tradition by
making such references ironic or comical. Postmodernism’s contribution has been judged
a mixed one. As early as 1979, Joseph Rykwert criticized it as an alternate modernist
architecture.

Perhaps criticism of this sort drove some to find again what constitutes the tradition of
classical architecture. The everincreasing success of the New Urbanist founders, Andres
Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, to restore the traditional art of making cities has
made evident that architectural historians, such as Yale University’s former professor
Vincent Scully, in professional schools where the curriculum is modernist, have had an
important role. An event perhaps of more symbolic than substantive importance in the
hoped-for ascendancy of classical architecture was HRH Prince Charles’s criticism of the
planned addition to Britain’s National Gallery. In his now-famous speech presented on
the 150th anniversary of the RIBA in 1984, he criticized the addition as a “monstrous
carbuncle on the face of a much-loved and elegant friend” and advocated, as he continues
to do, for a return to classical and traditional architecture. Remarkable are the number of
academies such as the one in New York, organizing groups such as INTBAU in London,
and university curriculums committed to classicism. Among the small group of such
universities, the strongest, but unique in the United States, is the University of Notre
Dame.

The most important polemicist for the architecture of traditional cities based on
classical principles from the late 1960s continues to be Leon Krier, who in 2003 was the
recipient of the first Driehaus Prize—the aim of which is to recognize annually the great
contributors to the practice of classical architecture or traditional architecture and
architectural preservation. Krier’s language, illustrations, and civic designs have the force
and clarity of a manifesto. He criticizes modernist architecture as a totalizing production
which has substituted that which has been traditionally appreciated as truly engaging in
buildings—including the accumulation of thousands of years of architectural
accommodation to social, political, and environmental circumstances—which classical
architecture is able to adapt. Presently, Poundbury, for which Krier has been the master
planner and whose patron is Prince Charles, is being raised in Dorchester, England. In
Krier’s paper architecture, and now in this built architecture, he argues that the making of
cities and the practice of classicism are disciplines best not separated. Many would say
that the present interest in classical architecture is not a stylistic revival but a return to an
important cultural habit of building.

JHENNIFER A.AMUNDSON AND CHRISTOPHER C.MILLER
AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin; Asplund, Erik Gunnar (Sweden); Behrens,
Peter (Germany); Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); Cret, Paul Philippe
(United States); Flatiron Building, New York City; Gropius, Walter
(Germany); Kahn, Louis (United States); Lutyens, Edwin (England);
McKim, Mead and White (United States); Modernism; Pennsylvania
Station, New York City; Postmodernism; Stockholm Public Library

Further Reading

Curtis, William J.R., Oxford: Phaidon, 1987
Davis, Howard, New York: Oxford University Press, 1999
Economakis, Richard, “Will the Early Moderns Please Step Forward?”
Bologna: A Vision of Europe, 2000
Krier, Leon, edited by Richard Economakis, London: Academy Editions, 1992
Rykwert, Joseph, “Inheritance or Tradition,” 49, 5/6 (1979)
Scott, Geoffrey, New York: Norton, 1999
Wiseman, Carter, New York: Norton, 1998

CLIMATE

Climate is characterized by the global, regional, and local distribution of solar radiation,
precipitation, temperature, wind, and humidity at the earth’s surface. The earth-sun
relationship that defines season combines with latitude, surface cover (land versus sea),
the water cycle, and movement of air masses, to generate global weather patterns. As
opposed to weather that takes place over a short time span, climate represents long-term
trends that are averaged over a time scale of several decades. These trends are classified
into climate types with names indicative of their dominant temperature and precipitation
features. Knowledge of the macroclimate of a representative city or region, in
combination with a qualitative understanding of local microclimate, allows architects,
builders, city planners, and landscape architects to modify indoor and outdoor
environments in ways that improve human comfort, reduce building energy consumption,
and optimize site resource use.

Indigenous builders recognized the relationships between shelter and
climate. James Marston Fitch, in his 1960 article “Primitive
Architecture and Climate,” clarified the empirical and evolutionary
wisdom of these builders to create efficient, comfortable, climate-
responsive structures in all regions of the world. Fitch also challenged
contemporary architects to demonstrate skill comparable to their

“primitive” counterparts in designing energy- and resource-efficient
structures that would satisfy their occupants’ needs. This challenge
became the focus of climate-responsive architecture for the 20th century:
to combine the wisdom of indigenous builders with contemporary building
science, technology, and design. The achievements of this era can be
summarized in three main categories: refined regional guidelines for
climate-responsive environmental design; new methods for assessing the
relationship between climate, human comfort, and energy use in buildings;
and an improved understanding of how urban environments influence
climate.

Regional Climate Analyses and Design
Guidelines

The most important contributions advancing architectural knowledge of climatic design
in the 20th century occurred in the post-World War II era. In 1949 the American Institute
of Architects’ Climate Control Project was the first major contribution to the field,
appearing both as a series of articles in the popular press and technical briefs in the
The principal author of these reports, climatologist Dr. Paul Siple, was hired by the
American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers to create regional climate
analyses and design data for a number of U.S. cities and their surrounding areas. The
project—to analyze climatic data in terms of its implications for residential design—was
the first major effort to summarize climate data for use by the architectural design
community.

There have been subsequent publications of regional climatic design
guidelines for buildings and their surrounding environments. The U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development contracted with the
American Institute of Architects’ Research Corporation to publish

(1980), which provides general climatic design recommendations for the
continental United States and Hawaii. (Watson and Labs, 1993) and
(Brown and Dekay, 2000) use design illustrations, monographs, rules of
thumb, and case study examples to communicate architectural design
strategies that respond to climate. Most works have been inspired by the
ideas presented in the 1963 book by Victor Olgyay, which has
greatly influenced several generations of architects interested in climatic

design.

Design Methods

The text was a substantive addition to the architect’s understanding of climate-
responsive design beyond the provision of design guidelines. The author developed a
quantitative method for assessing human comfort in relationship to exterior climate
conditions. The “Bioclimatic Chart,” as it is called, plots dry-bulb temperature against
relative humidity and delineates a portion of the chart as the “comfort zone”; that is, the
range of thermal conditions in which a sedentary young adult dressed in lightweight
clothing would experience comfort in the shade. For climate conditions outside this zone,
the chart indicates how modifications of sun, wind, and moisture can render comfort in
spite of the naturally occurring conditions. The Bioclimatic Chart still enjoys a place in
architectural design methods although it has evolved through the contributions of others.
Givoni and Milne (1976) showed, in this case adopting the psychometric chart, how
comfort can be achieved indoors through passive and low-energy design strategies. The
relationship between human comfort, acclimatization, and appropriate building strategies
is an emerging field of study as architects and engineers realize the need to optimize both
energy consumption and environmental performance in buildings.

Computer software to analyze regional climate data and their design implications is
another important development in design methods in the 20th century. The most notable
software packages in this category are Climate Consultant from UCLA and
METEONORM from Meteotest. Sources for U.S. climatological data used by these
software packages and by other calculation methods include the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC), and
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). When based on actual
measurements, these data are compiled from a sparse observation network of weather
stations on the ground or of sky-based instruments (such as satellites and weather
balloons), typically recorded for agricultural or military purposes. When actual data are
not available, they can be approximated using mathematical or statistical methods.
Typical Meteorological Year (TMY2) data from NREL, for example, are based on actual
measurements and mathematical models. Climate data are instrumental to climate
analysis for building energy simulation software (e.g., Energy-10, Energy Scheming,
Solar-5) that allows designers to estimate the effect of climate on indoor temperatures as
well as building energy consumption. More research is needed for the application of these
data to modeling of microclimates around buildings and open spaces at the city scale.

Climate Modification

Although the effects of urbanization on climate have been noted since Roman
antiquity—from the writings of architect and engi-neer Marcus Vitruvius Pollio in the Ist
century B.C. to the odes of Quintus Horatius Flaccus around 24 B.C_—measurement and
modeling of these effects gained greater attention in the 20th century A.D. Motorized
traverses of urban centers to measure air temperature gradients between cities and their
surrounding rural countrysides began in 1917. The field of urban climatology, which
examines the effect of cities on climate, has emerged as the principal discipline engaged
in this study. Its purpose is to assess the effects of urban buildings, transportation
systems, and industrial activities on the atmospheric and hydrologic cycles and their
associated energy and water balances. Detailed studies of one climate phenomenon in

particular, the urban heat island effect, preoccupied many scientists and researchers in the
20th century.

Urban heat islands are attributed to a combination of influences that cause air
temperatures in cities to be higher than in surrounding suburban or rural areas. Cities
exhibit increased thermal storage potential, for waste heat as well as incident solar
radiation, by their massive construction materials commonly used in buildings and
streetscapes (such as concrete and asphalt, respectively). The effect is more pronounced
at night because cities have a slower rate of nocturnal radiant cooling than surrounding
rural areas. Finally, cities experience less evaporative cooling because of increased runoff
from paved surfaces and limited vegetation to retain moisture in urban environments. The
urban heat island effect has been documented in cities throughout the world using
satellite imagery and ground-based measurement. Because of the negative effect on
cooling energy consumption in most cities (except in cold climates), design
recommendations, such as white roofs and selective planting, are cited as mitigation
measures for the urban heat island effect.

The question of climate change on a global scale fueled a central debate at the end of
the 20th century. Large computer programs called GCMs (known as General Circulation
or Global Climate Models) were being used by scientists to predict the magnitude of
change in temperature and precipitation for changes in atmospheric concentrations of
carbon dioxide. Evidence of climate change has also been detected in paleoclimatological
records obtained from ice cores, for example. The Interagency Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), formed in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization and the United
Nations Environmental Program, continues an internationally coordinated effort to
investigate the hypothesis that surface temperatures worldwide have been increasing as a
result of anthropogenic change and, to a lesser degree, natural climatic variability.

In the last two decades of the 20th century, world leaders and a wide array of
international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) convened to determine appropriate
policy responses to global climate change. The most notable policy actions resulting from
these landmark events were the 1987 Montreal Protocol to combat ozone depletion, the
1997 Kyoto Agreement for reducing greenhouse gases, and the 1992 Rio Summit
“Agenda 21,” a worldwide plan for global environmental action. The architectural and
planning ramifications of climate change have yet to be translated into discernible
actions, with a few exceptions such as the phasing out of chloro-fluorocarbons (CFCs)
used in building materials and systems.

Environmental sustainability, as an approach to architectural design and urban
planning, has renewed understanding of the importance of climate in the design of
buildings, landscapes, and cities. As a result of developments in the 20th century,
regional guidelines, design methods, and documentation of regional and global climate
phenomena have advanced designers’ abilities to predict environmental performance of
buildings in their surroundings based on climate. From the bioclimatic skyscrapers of
architect Kenneth Yeang to the solar planned subdivision of Village Homes in Davis,
California, climateadapted design has proven to be economically, aesthetically, and
environmentally sound.


MARGOT MCDONALD

Further Reading

Historical perspective on climate-responsive architecture is described in Fitch and
Bobenhausen (1999) and Fitch and Branch (1960). Design guidelines for climate-
responsive architecture, rules of thumb, and case study examples can be found in the
references (AJA Research Corporation 1980; Brown and Dekay 2000; Givoni 1998;
Lechner 2000; Loftness 1981; Olgyay 1963; Siple 1949; Watson and Labs 1993). Site
planning with microclimate and energy considerations can be found in Brown (1995) and
Robinette (1983). Climate-related software is available through Milne (1991). Climate
data are available through NCDC (1983) and NREL (1995). Additional reading on urban
climatology is found in Givoni (1998), Landsberg (1981), Oke (1987), and Akbari et al.
(1992). Global climate change is described in Houghton (1996).

AIA Research Corporation, written for HUD, Office of Policy and Research, and

the U.S. Dept. of Energy, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1980
Akbari, Hashem, Susan Davis, Sofia Dorsano, et al., Washington, D.C.: U.S.
EPA, DOE, and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1992
Brown, G.Z., and Mark Dekay, New York: Wiley, 1985; 2nd edition, 2000
Brown, Robert D., and Terry J.Gillespie, New York: Wiley, 1995
Fitch, James Marston, and Bob Bobenhausen, New York: Oxford University Press,
1999
Fitch, James Marston, and Daniel Branch, “Primitive Architecture and Climate,” 230
(December 1960)

Givoni, Baruch, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1998
Houghton, J. (editor), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996
Landsberg, Helmut E., San Francisco: Academic Press, 1981
Lechner, Norbert, New York: Wiley, 1992; 2nd edition, 2000

Lofiness, Vivian, | Washington, D.C.: Association of Collegiate Schools of
Architecture, 1981
Milne, Murray, and software, UCLA Department of Architecture and Urban Design,
http:/Avww.aud.ucla.edu/energy-design-tools/, 1991
NCDC, Asheville, N.C.: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Environmental Science Services
Administration, Environmental Data Services, 1983
NREL, — Golden, Colorado: National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 1995
Olgyay, Victor, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1963
Oke, T.R., | New York: Routledge, 1978; 2nd edition, 1987
Robinette, Gary O., New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983
Siple, Paul A., “Regional Climate Analysis and Design Data,” (September 1949)
Watson, Donald, and Kenneth Labs, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983; 2nd edition, 1993

CODERCH Y DE SENTMENAT, JOSE
ANTONIO 1913-84

Architect, Spain

José Antonio Coderch y de Sentmenat was a Catalan architect born in Barcelona. He
completed his architectural education at the Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura,
Barcelona, in 1940, later teaching there as a professor between 1965 and 1968. From
1936 to 1939, he fought in the Spanish civil war. Until he established his own private
architectural practice in 1947, he gained architectural experience at the offices of the
Director-General of Architecture in Madrid; the City Architect in Sitges, Spain; Obra
Sindical del Hogar in Barcelona; and Barcelona’s Naval Institute. He was an active
participant in the architectural group Team X, which he joined in 1961. After an
accomplished career in Spanish architecture, he died on 6 November 1984 in Barcelona.

Coderch was influenced by the work of Madrid architect Secundino Zuazu and greatly
admired the work of Finnish architect Alvar Aalto. He admired popular Mediterranean
architecture, adapting it with a contemporary modern idiom. This combination prompted
Kenneth Frampton in to refer to him as a “Catalan Regionalist.” The first built
example of this hybridization was Coderch’s eight-story ISM apartment block (1951) in
Barcelona.

Arguably one of Coderch’s most significant contributions to 20th-century architectural
thinking was his questioning of the importance of architectural geniuses. In his article
“There Are No Geniuses That We Need Now,” Coderch contests the need for great
leaders with absolute doctrines and universal principles. Rather, he argues for a transfer
of responsibility to individual architects, empowered by their devotion, goodwill, and
honor, all guided by the architect’s personal intuition. Similarly, he advocated for the
return of an architectural “trade.”

More recently, Coderch has been recognized for his contributions to post-World War
II Spanish architecture. For example, Barcelona architect Ignacio de Sola-Morales has
reappraised Coderch’s work to demonstrate his lasting contributions. Although
previously dismissed by some of his colleagues, Coderch has won new recognition
among critics, leading to his receipt of the professional Merit Medal FAD, Barcelona, in
1977.

An important pursuit for Coderch was the deconstruction of pedagogical systems in
architecture. His teaching and concern for the training of young Spanish architects were
outlined most clearly in his “Letter to Young Architects” in (174 [July-September
1987]). He contended that architectural students should engage with life rather than
architectural history alone. His outspoken, aggressive, and reactionary position to
architectural education is well known. His teaching has been characterized by his
impatience with student laziness and ignorance. Despite this approach, he was forever
hopeful of the impact of the independent architectural graduate.

Coderch’s work has been described as inquisitive and transgressive. His interest lay in
architectural form and its plasticity. One of his most renowned domestic projects, the
Casa Ugalde (1951), exemplifies this interest. Influenced by its location in Cadeques, an
isolated beach town near Barcelona, the Casa Ugalde translates the local vernacular into a

piece of “modern” abstract architecture. Characterized by its framed views, the house
exploits the landscape. In plan it has been described as both poetic and arabesque. An
enormous shaded terrace moderates the effects of the Mediterranean sun. This interest in
climatic control is reflected in a number of other important housing projects designed by
Coderch. These include the single-family dwellings Casa Catasus (1956) in Sitges and
Casa Uriach (1961) in L’Ametlla del Vallés. The experimentation in climatic control by
Coderch continued in a number of multifamily-housing schemes, including the ISM
apartments (1951) in Barcelona, the Il Girasol apartments (1966; inspired and translated
as the sunflower) in Madrid, and the Las Cocheras apartment building (1968) in
Barcelona. These projects used hinged panels, louvers, roll-down screens, balconies, and
stepped facades to allow, black, or filter light into interior rooms.

Not all Coderch’s work was residential. Two notable commercial projects that he
designed are the Trade Office Building (1965) and Institute Frances (1972) in Barcelona.
Both projects exploit the glass facade made famous by German architect Ludwig Mies
van der Rohe.

Exhibitions were another important activity in Coderch’s career. His seven-by-eight-
meter pavilion for the 1951 Ninth Trienniale in Milan sought to confirm the Spanish
presence on the European architectural scene. A Spanish-made straw cloth sheet; a large,
rotating natural finish timber shutter; and a table occupied the pavilion space and were
decorated with sculptures, ceramics, and photographs of Spanish crafts. For this
exhibition he was awarded a Gold Medal and a Grand Prize. He exhibited at the National
Fine Art Exhibition in Madrid in 1960, received a Gold Medal for the Centre Pompidou
in Paris in 1978, and exhibited at the Transformations in Modern Architecture Exhibition
at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1979,

Coderch’s early architectural career was relatively unrecognized. Exhibitions at the
Centre Pompidou and the Museum of Modern Art toward the end of his career increased
his profile, elevating acceptance of his work internationally and in his own country. The
recently cited effect of his Casa Ugalde on the Cap Marinet House (1985-87) of Spanish
architects Elias Torres and J.A.Martinez Lapefia in C.M.Aris’s article in reaffirms his
contribution. His strong opposition to pedagogical systems in architecture and his poetic,
climate-responsive designs contributed significantly to 20th-century architecture.

IGEA TROIANI

Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Barcelona, Spain

Biography

Born in Barcelona, 25 November 1913. Earned doctor of architecture degree at the
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura, Barcelona 1940. Served as a lieutenant in the
Spanish civil war 1936-39. Married Ana Maria Giménez Ramos 1943; children: 4.
Worked in the offices of the Director-General of Architecture, Madrid 1940-42, Offices
of the City Architect, Sitges, Spain 1942-45, the Obra Sindical del Hogar, Barcelona
1944-52, and at the Naval Institute, Barcelona 1949-52; commenced a private
architectural practice in Barcelona in partnership with J.Sanz Luengo 1947-67, after
which he was in partnership with G. Coderch Giménez; joined Team X, 1961. Taught as

a professor at the Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura, Barcelona 1965-68. Died in
Barcelona 6 November 1984.

Selected Works

Casa Ferrer Vidal, Cala d’Or, Majorca, 1946
Casa Garriga Nogués, Sitges, 1947
Casa Ugalde, Cadeques, 1951
Building, Barceloneta, or ISM Apartments, Barcelona, 1951
Pabellon de Espafia, or Spanish Pavilion, Ninth Triennale, Milan, 1951
Casa Coderch, Cadeques, 1955
Casa Catasus, Sitges, 1956
Casa Senillosa, Gerona, 1956
Lamp Design, 1957
Casa Coderch Mila, Cadeques, 1958
Casa Tapies, Barcelona, 1960
Casa Paricio, San Feliu de Codines, 1961
Casa Uriach, L’Ametlla del Vallés, 1961
Casa Rozés, Rosas, Gerona, 1962
Hotel de Mar, Palma, Majorca, 1962
Trade Office Building, Barcelona, 1965
Casa Gili, Sitges, 1965
Il Girasol Apartments, Madrid, 1966
Casa Entrecanales, Madrid, 1966
Las Cocheras Apartment Building, Sarria, Barcelona, 1968
Casa Raventdés, Matadepera, 1970

Institute Frances, Barcelona, 1972

Selected Publications

“There Are No Geniuses That We Need Now,” (1961)
“Letter to Young Architects,” quoted in 174 (July-September 1987)

Further Reading

Aris, Carlos Marti, “Other Versions of the Patio: On Two Houses by Torres Tur and
Martinez Lapefia,” 10/48 (April- May 1991)
Cabrero, Gabriel Ruiz, “A Long Converstion and a Gift,’ (Madrid), 73/294 (December
1992)
Frampton, Kenneth, London: Thames and Hudson, and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1980; 3rd edition, Thames and Hudson, 1992
Leet, Stephen, “Mysterious Realities: The Genius of Jose Antonio Coderch,” 11/10
(June 1992)

Sherwood, Roger, “Two Sunflowers,” 38/3 (Spring 1985)
Smithson, Alison (editor), Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1962
Smithson, Peter (editor), “Team 10 at Royaumont,” 45 (November 1975)

COHEN, JEAN-LOUIS 1949-

Architectural historian, France

First trained as an architect, Jean-Louis Cohen subsequently earned a doctorate from
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales. In 1994 New York University’s
Institute of Fine Arts awarded him the architectural history chair created for Henry-
Russell Hitchcock and later occupied by Reyner Banham and Richard Pommer. Cohen
stopped teaching between 1979 and 1983 to expand and manage France’s government
research funds for architectural history, theory, and technology.

An articulate writer, popular lecturer, commentator for the French media, and leader of
research teams, Cohen has greatly contributed to expanding the knowledge and
understanding of Western architecture and urbanism in the first half of the 20th century.
His initial expertise on Soviet avant-garde architecture led him to study Le Corbusier’s
personal and theoretical effect in the Soviet Union as well as the career of French
modernist and pro-Soviet architect André Lurgat.

Cohen’s studies of cosmopolitan aspects of French architecture are also
groundbreaking; with Hartmut Frank he directed a team that compared policies
implemented by the Germans in Alsace-Lorraine in 1940-44 and by the French in the
Baden and Saar regions in 1945-50. In addition he has analyzed the French infatuation
with Italian architecture in the 1970s. The Centre Georges Pompidou entrusted him with
the architecture section for its Paris-Moscow exhibit and named him scientific adviser for
the mammoth 1987 retrospective “L’Aventure Le Corbusier.” Although Cohen has
organized shows on behalf of the Pavilion de 1’Arsenal and Les Années 30 for the Musée
des Monuments Francais, his best-known curatorial endeavor remains “Scenes of the
World to Come: European Architecture and the American Challenge, 1893-1960,” a
spectacular display of artifacts related to Europe’s fascination with American
architecture, organized by the Canadian Centre for Architecture in Montreal. The premise
of the exhibition, as Cohen defined it, was that European architects and engineers were
intrigued by the iron-and-steel structure that supported the classicizing facades of the
World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago. The following decades witnessed an
ongoing interaction between European architectural practice and thinking and the
contemporary American profession as the skyscraper and mass production reshaped
urban environments.

Overall, Cohen’s intent has been to explore how the complementary, and at times
contradictory, social and aesthetic concepts of modernism, modernity, and modernization
have affected the built environment on an international scale and to place these currents
into a broader political and cultural context. Cohen has served on the editorial boards of

and. He sits on the boards of the Fondation Le Corbusier and the Canadian Centre
for Architecture and is the only non-American member of the Council for Architecture


and Design at New York’s Museum of Modern Art. In 1998 his visibility,
cosmopolitanism, sense of leadership, and organization, which are unparalleled among
French architectural historians and critics, led to his nomination by the minister of culture
as the head of the Institut Frangais d’ Architecture and Musée des Monuments Frangais.

ISABELLE GOURNAY

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Paris, France

Biography

Born 20 July 1949 in Paris; studied Ecole Spéciale d’Architecture, Paris 1967-70;
received diploma, Unité Pédagogique d’ Architecture 6, Paris 1973; Researcher, Institut
de l’Environment, Paris 1973-76; taught at the Ecole Paris d’Architecture, Paris-Villemin
1975-96; Scientific Director, Secrétariat 4 la Recherche Architectural, Ministére, de
l’Urbanisme et du Logement 1979-83; Associate Professor, Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées
1980-89; received Ph.D. in art history, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales
1985; Professor, Institut Francais d’Urbanisme (Université Paris 8) 1996-98.

Selected Publications

(edited with Bruno Fortier) Paris: Editions Babylone, Pavilion de I’ Arsenal, 1989
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1992 (first published in
French in 1987)
(edited with André Lortie) Paris: Picard, Pavilion de l’Arsenal, 1992
“America: a Soviet Ideal,” 5 (January 1984)
Paris: Institut Francais d’Architecture, and Liége, Pierre Mardaga, 1995
(Monique Eleb, co-author) Paris: Hazan, 1999
“Modernism in Uniform: Occupation architecture in France and Germany (1940—1950),”
in edited by Taisto H.Makela and Wallis Miller, New York: Princeton Architectural
Press, 1991
London: E and FN Spon, 1995 (with Monique Eleb) “Paris, the 20th Century
Architecture and Urbanism,” —_ (special issue) (1990)

COLLINS, PETER 1920-81

Architecture historian, England (became Canadian citizen 1962)

Peter Collins was one of the leading architectural historians of his generation and a
doyen of the English-language historians and theorists of 20th-century architecture. Born
in Leeds in Yorkshire in 1920, his architectural studies at Leeds College of Art began in
1936 (diploma in architecture in 1948) but were interrupted by seven years in the British


army, serving in the Yorkshire Hussars; as an intelligence officer in the Middle East and
Italy; and finally as captain, General Staff at the War Office, London. On graduation, he
went to Switzerland and France to work on the design of reinforced-concrete structures,
including working on Auguste Perret’s reconstruction of Le Havre. In 1951 he returned to
England to lecture in architecture at Manchester and, later, to begin graduate work there
under Professor Cordingly. His Master of Arts thesis, “The Development of Architectural
Theory in France in the Mid-Eighteenth Century,” was completed in 1955. The year
before that, he received a Silver Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects for
his essay “Jacques-Francis Blondel.” In Paris in August 1953, he married Margaret
Taylor of Ottawa, leading to his later relocation to Canada.

The year he completed his work at Manchester, Collins received a Fulbright Traveling
Scholarship and an appointment to lecture in architectural history at Yale University. In
1956 he was appointed an associate professor at McGill University, and in 1962, he was
appointed a full professor of architecture. He became responsible for reorganizing the
undergraduate courses in the history and theory of architecture and completed a book that
was inspired by his work with Perret, earning him the Henry Florence Architectural
Book Scholarship in 1960. In 1962 he became a Canadian citizen.

In 1965 Collins wrote his most successful book, which traces the intellectual
development of modern architectural theories. It is the antithesis of a picture book.
Buildings are shown as the result of thoughts based on the ideals of each age of Western
culture. Collins recognized the importance of analogies and metaphors in architectura.
iconography. In this he followed in the footsteps of Geoffrey Scott’s (1924).

That same year, during which he took a sabbatical leave from McGill, Collins returned
to Yale as a research fellow to study at the University Law School, leading to a Master of
Laws degree in 1971 from Queens College, Montreal, for his thesis “Amenity, a Study of
Jurisprudential Concepts Which Affect the Legal Control of Urban Environments, and
Their Relevance to Canadian Constitutional Law.” Based on this, his last book,
(1971), a comparative study in decision making in architecture and law, was published. In
this seminal work, Collins explored the relevance of architectural journals and found
them sadly wanting. Too often, they are seen to be editorial propaganda for favored
architects and are filled with little effective criticism. In comparing them with law
journals, Collins showed how the focus on a full understanding of precedent in the latter
might well be an appropriate standard to which architectural journals might aspire, with
the benefit of advancing standards of architecture. In this and his other writings, he
constantly pointed to the social and cultural standards by which architecture should be
judged.

An ideal teacher, always well prepared himself, Collins encouraged a rigorous
attention to detail among his students. In addition about 100 essays and reviews have
appeared with his name in most of the architectural periodicals in North America and
England, and for a time he was architectural correspondent to the . He also wrote the
article “Architectural Theory” for the _. Early in his career, Collins developed a special
love and knowledge of the architecture of France. This gave him standards by which to
measure and allowed him to comment seriously on all kinds of architecture. An eye for
humbug always aroused a quick response in him. In 1972 the American Institute of
Architects’ Architecture Critic’s Citation recognized his eminent contribution to
architectural thought.


W.P.THOMPSON

Biography

Born in Leeds, Yorkshire, 1920. Began architectural studies at Leeds College of Art
1936; received diploma in architecture 1948; studies were interrupted by seven years of
service in the British army. Married Margaret Taylor of Ottawa 1953. Completed M.A.
thesis, University of Manchester, 1955; received Fulbright Traveling Scholarship and an
appointment to lecture in architectural history at Yale University 1955; appointed
associate professor, McGill University 1956, and full professor of architecture 1962.
Became a Canadian citizen 1962. Received Master of Laws degree, Queens College,
Montreal 1971, Died 1981.

Selected Publications

New York: Horizon, 1959
“In Search of a Flaw in Architectural Education,” 36 (January 1959)
“Historicism,” 128/762 (August 1960)
“The Form-Givers,” no. 7 (1961)
“Aspects of Ornament,” «129/772 (June 1961)
“Furniture Givers as Form Givers: Is Design an All-Encompassing Skill?’ 44 (March
1963)
1965; 2nd edition, Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press, 1998
“The Philosophy of Architectural Criticism,” 49/1 (January 1968)
London: Faber; 1971
“Peter Collins: Selected Writings,” 4/34 (Summer 1984)

Further Reading

Bland, John, and Derek Drummond, “Peter Collins (1920-198 1),”
26/2 (April 1982)

COLOGNE, GERMANY

With the Rhine River winding slowly through the city and its towering cathedral spires,
Cologne has long provided the German imagination with rich images of artistic and
national Romanticism. Its idyllic landscape and key location on a major waterway have
supported the city’s evolution as an important commercial and industrial center. The

history of Cologne’s architectural developments in the 20th century clearly joins the two
strands of artistic enchantment and dynamic economy.

The city’s built landscape served a distinct defensive function at the close of the 19th
century. Developments in military technology had brought about an increased target
range of weapons, and Cologne’s medieval city wall with its buffer zone leading up to
fortification structures was insufficient to protect Cologne from enemy fire. In 1881 the
Prussian government moved the inner medieval fortress ring outward, and the
approximately one-square-mile, crescent-shaped area created by the relocation of the
wall, Neustadt, was then quickly constructed. No longer cramped behind the 600-year-old
city wall, Cologne’s turn-of-the-century population of over 400,000 had room to continue
its process of growth and urbanization. In 1907-14 the defensive structures underwent
further alterations. The fortification numbered 182 units on the eve of World War I, and
almost all these were subsequently torn down per the Treaty of Versailles, putting an end
to Cologne’s military and architectural status as a”fortress city.” Konrad Adenauer,
Cologne’s lord mayor from 1917 to 1933, successfully convinced the Allies to allow a
handful of the fortresses to remain as historical documents.

As modern military technology changed the location and layout of the city, suburbs
dominated by factories began to crop up around the outskirts of the city. The population
continued to grow, helped along by a pattern of incorporating communities, extending the
geographic contours of the city eastward across the river. The industrialization and
commercialization of Cologne brought about construction projects that facilitated the
transportation of goods and people throughout the city. The construction of the Deutzer
Bridge (1911-13) united both sides of the Rhine, and the widening and merger of
existing alleys into the Giirzenichstrasse created a modern access road to the bridge on
the east side of the river.

The construction of major department stores such as Kaufhaus Tietz (designed by
Wilhelm Kreis, 1912-14) supported the trend toward urbanization. The Kaufhaus Tietz
building, situated between Hohe Strasse and Giirzenichstrasse, represented a new
architectural form with its symmetrical, imposing form and three glass-covered
courtyards. In 1933 the Tietz firm was one of the first victims of the National Socialists’
policy of “Aryanization.” The Jewish family Tietz lost their position as head of the
company, and the firm was renamed Westdeutsche Kaufhof AG.Allied bombing
damaged the interior and the foundation of the building. In 1953 the firm was renamed
once again, acquiring the simpler title Kaufhof Aktiengesellschaft, which it retains today.

Such monumental architecture reflected Rhineland architects’ belief that they could
affect the world with their constructions, and this conviction led to buildings that were
assigned a pedagogical and therapeutic role by their designers. In 1914 Bruno Taut
constructed one of the first Expressionist buildings with his polygonal Glaspalast (the
glass palace) for the Werk-bund Exhibition in Cologne, which took place on what are
now the trade-show grounds. Under the pavilion’s cupola, made up of diamond-shaped
glass bricks, a band of six short rhymes by Paul Scheerbart celebrated the potential for
architecture to improve society. Focusing primarily on glass and light, these included
(Colored glass/destroys hate) and (Glass brings the new era to us/Brick culture
only pains us). The building, which has not survived, and the exhibition firmly
established Cologne as a major figure on the international and national architecture
stages.

Under Konrad Adenauer the city saw a number of new designs in the
interwar period, from Rhine Romantic to international modern, but all
with a decidedly German reference. Although the war had suffocated an
explicitly Expressionist architectural movement, the prewar Utopian
vision of beauty, light, and glass continued to influence construction plans,
particularly with reference to the emerging social interest in hygiene and
sports and the growing population. Before the war Cologne’s population
numbered almost 600,000 inhabitants. By the mid-1920s this number rose
to over 700,000. With the elimination of the fortress structures, city
planners were free to push Cologne’s

Maria Konigein, Cologne-Marienburg,
Germany, designed by Dominikus
Béhm (1954)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

borders out further again, onto land that had once been reserved for defense purposes.
The need for increased work and recreation spaces, combined with Expressionist
influences and interwar local patriotism, brought about an explosion of new constructions
in all sectors.

Inspired by the parks in the city of Diisseldorf, Adenauer created the greenbelts or
rings encircling Cologne (1921-24). These areas consisted of a seven-kilometer-long
inner ring and a 30-kilometer-long outer green ring that followed the fortification lines
and incorporated the remaining forts in their landscape. Designed in part by the Hamburg
architect and city planner Fritz Schumacher, the belts were part of the designs for
Cologne that envisioned a unity of living, working, relaxation, and transportation. This
connection between mind and body, accompanied an increased enthusiasm for sports as
well, was symbolized by the stadium and swimming facility constructed by Adolf Abel in
1926, city planner from 1925 to 1930. Two monumental, matching buildings flanked the
sport center’s entrance, flat-roofed, with straight, imposing lines and massive brick
pillars.

A further remnant of Fortress Cologne found a use for the construction of the Bastei
restaurant (1923-24) by Wilhelm Riphahn, reconstructed by him in 1958 after it had been
badly burned during World War IJ. Built on an abandoned structure of the fortress wall,
the defensive tower houses three administrative and storage levels, and the kitchen is in a
corner of the top floor, overlooking the street. The dining area projects over the river, a
glass-paneled half circle like a Ferris wheel turned on its side and framed with steel
struts, topped with a star-shaped flat roof and encircled by a terrace. The Expressionist
reference to glass and jagged forms is unmistakable, but the Bastei also showed elements
of an emerging functionalism, such as using glass to increase the view of the river. This
peculiar interwar combination of Expressionism, functionalism, and local patriotism can
also be seen in Riphahn and Caspar Maria Grod’s Kélnsiche Zeitung, a newspaper
building shaped like a ship’s bow that alludes to the Rhine.

Ideas about light and green spaces extended to the new residential areas, and many of
these constructions are exemplary of Cologne’s Neues Bauen (New Building) movement.
Riphahn and Grod’s Blauer Hof estate (1926-28) in the Buchforst district, unusual for its
block structure, provided residents with light, air, trees, and green courtyards. The
architects designed the apartments of the neighboring estate, Weisse Stadt, at a slant to
provide optimum lighting; its row-by-row layout of units became quite popular for
housing. Their residential area Zoll-stock Siedling (1927-29) comprised apartments
designed to reflect the shared economic and social status of the middle-class civil
servants and private-sector residents. Each unit included a separate kitchenette instead of
the combined kitchen and living area typical for the region, thereby demonstrating the
residents’ higher social status. The Melanchthon church (1929-30) there, designed by
Theodor Merrill, intentionally provided Zollstock with a social center. The church
sustained damage during the war and has been restored with some alterations.

Commercial buildings reemerged in the interwar period as important constructions.
Jacob Koerfer’s L-shaped Hansa-Hochhaus (1924-25), comprising a long, seven-story
unit and a 17-story tower, presented a trend toward horizontal forms. Nevertheless, at
more than 213 feet, it was briefly the tallest building in Europe. With its alternating rows
of glass and limestone, the Dischhaus (1928-30), designed by Bruno Paul, represented a
clearer modern emphasis on smooth, vertical, flowing lines. Destroyed in World War II,


it has been rebuilt according to the original plans. The completion of the autobahn
between Cologne and Bonn in 1932 offered infrastructural transportation support to these
commercial projects.

The National Socialists’ seizure of power in 1933 brought about a cleansing of the
Martinsviertel quarter, a project actually developed under Adenauer to combat the
poverty and crime rampant in that part of the city. The Nazis chased “undesirables” out of
the area and expropriated great numbers of buildings from Jews. Architects fused old and
new buildings together, creating a changed topography that evoked an idealistic image of
a German medieval inner city. Nazi planners envisioned the inner city as a visual
reference to the party’s claims of a German heritage, whereas the surrounding modern
city, with its monumental parade alleys, contributed to a sense of historical evolution.

World War II bombing almost entirely destroyed Cologne. The historic inner city lost
90 percent of its buildings, and urban areas saw irreparable damage to 70 percent of
residences. The cathedral, although still standing, was badly damaged, as were many
Romanesque churches. Only 40,000 people of the prewar 800,000 population continued
to live in Cologne. The “Adolf Hitler Mountain,” as locals referred to the overwhelming
pile of rubble left by the destruction in the center of the city, disappeared only slowly
over the years until 1955. Planners ripped down many 19th-century buildings in the
postwar years, electing to reconstruct a number of the 1930s buildings in the massive
neoclassical style of Nazism.

The postwar years focused on reclaiming Cologne’s architectural past. In 1948
residents celebrated the 700th anniversary of the cathedral. In 1956 repairs to the building
had been completed, allowing visitors once again full access to the city’s icon.
Dominikus Béhm and his son Gottfried continued the elder’s interwar program of
constructing new churches, using new materials such as concrete and circular styles that
reflected changes in the function of the church as a center of community life. Dominikus
Bohm had built the tower of his St. Engelbert Church (1930) standing apart from the
main building, keeping the form of the main building as reflective of its purpose to unify
the congregation. St. Maria Kénigin (1952-54), also designed by Dominikus Bohm, uses
a south-facing picture window as the primary source of light, and its baptistery is entirely
glass. Gottfried Bohm constructed the tower in 1960. The combination of round forms
and straight lines in brick and concrete used in Dominikus B6hm’s Christi Auferstehung
Church (1968) provides an example of the plasticity typical of the Brutalism movement,
evident as well in the architect Oswald Matthias Ungers’s own private home and office
(1958-59). The library annex in 1989 used almost exclusively cubes and squares and
acquired an explicit humanistic, pedagogical function.

The architectural competition for the Wallraf-Richartz Museum in 1978 demonstrated
the importance that discussions surrounding architectural projects have had in Cologne.
Although neither James Stirling’s Postmodern design for the museum nor Ungers’s plan,
which called for the museum building itself to open up new spaces in the city, was
realized, both contributed to a new era of architecture in Cologne and Germany. The
winning plan, by Peter Busman and Godfrid Haberer (1980-86), a reinforced-concrete
structure with overhanging red brick walls, housed the Wallraf-Richartz, the Ludwig
Museum, and the Philharmonic. Ungers later won a competition for the new Wallraf-
Richartz Museum, which once again reflected his preference for cube forms. The
museum opened for exhibits in January 2001 to critical acclaim for the architectural


design as well as the display of the museum’s holdings, successfully helping Cologne in
its struggle to edge out Berlin as Germany’s leading cultural city.

The end of the 20th century demonstrated the “cathedral city’s” commitment to
preserving its cultural heritage while looking forward architecturally. The ruins left by
the war of the Church of St. Kolumba will be incorporated into a new building for the
relocated diocesan museum of Cologne, a competition won by Peter Zumthor in 1997.
The following year marked the 750th anniversary of the cathedral and a new series of
reconstructions for that building. As restorers voice concern over the damage effected by
pollution to the flying buttresses, the cathedral remains a looming reminder of the
evolving role of the city’s artistic and commercial past in the construction of its built
landscape.

BENITA CAROL BLESSING
Béhm, Gottfried (Germany); Taut, Bruno (Germany); Ungers, Oswald
Mathias (Germany); Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne (1914); Zumthor,

Peter (Switzerland)

Further Reading

Architekten- und Ingenierverein Kéln e.v., ed. — Cologne: J.P.Bachem, 1991

Hall, Heribert, Cologne: J.P.Bachem, 1999
Heinen, Werner, and Anne M Pfeffer, Cologne: J.P.Bachem, 1988
Kier, Hiltrud, Cologne: J.P.Bachem, 1999

Kierdorf, Alexander, Berlin: Reimer, 1999

Kierdorf, Alexander, Dieter Klein-Meynen, and Henriette Meynen, —_ Cologne:

Wienand, 1996
Koshar, Rudy, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998
Wallraf-Richartz-Museum, Cologne: DuMont, 2001

COLOR

Color had always been fundamental to the visual and symbolic human experience of
architecture until the advent of modernism, which largely dismissed its evocative effects
as ornamental and unmodern. Subjugated for decades by the monochromatic architecture
of the International Style, color reemerged in the latter half of the 20th century to again
take its place as a significant design aspect of architectural form.

By the beginning of the 20th century, the scientific understanding of color through
theories of physical light, pigments, and human perception was accepted within standard
artistic methods and incorporated into art and design education. Following the color
experiments of Cubism, the Dutch De Stijl movement conceptualized a spatial use of
color to unify two-and three-dimensional forms. In (1923), Cor van Eesteren, Theo van
Doesburg, and Gerrit Rietveld argued, “We have given color its rightful place in

architecture and we assert that painting separated from the architectonic construction (i.e.
the picture) has no right to exist.” This theory was followed rigorously in architectural
examples, such as Gerrit Rietveld’s Schréder-Schrader House, a design that dispersed
painter Piet Mondrian’s floating planes of color into three dimensions.

Design instruction at the Bauhaus carefully limited color application to abstract
compositions and the intrinsic color of materials. Color theory and composition was one
of the fundamental principles taught within the Preliminary (“Basic”) Course, and color
was considered to be instructional content of the same importance as building materials
in later courses. Among the significant instructors at the Bauhaus who contributed to the
evolution of color theory were Paul Klee, Johannes Itten, and Josef Albers.

Though methods of Bauhaus instruction became popular throughout architecture
schools, color was largely dismissed as an aspect of architectural design because of the
modernist dictum against ornamentation. White planar surfaces and structural elements
became the formal language of modernism as it spread throughout the world as the
International Style. Paradoxically, the work of a number of significant Modern architects
still involved color theory and application. Bruno Taut combined practice as an artist with
architectural design, as did Le Corbusier, who produced complex color schemes for
particular elements within his buildings, sometimes examined through dozens of paint
swatches and colored sketches (Unite d’Habitation, 1945-52). After being reconstructed
in 1986, the richly colored stone surfaces of Mies van der Rohe’s German Pavilion
(1929)}—known after its demolition only through black-and-white photographs—were
recognized to be as intentionally spatial as the architectural forms themselves.

Among architects who designed through modernism’s influence, Luis Barragan
integrated color most fully into spatial effects. His Cuadra San Cristobal in Mexico
(1968) and the Francisco Gilardi House (1976), with its striking blue-walled dining room
and floating red column over water, are among his most significant achievements.

By midcentury advances in engineering and psychology began to create new
“functional” color sciences that ranged from thermal absorption of surfaces to human
visual recognition. Schemes of colorization were classified for building safety and egress
as well as for building components, such as wiring and mechanical systems. Renzo Piano
and Richard Rogers used these as an aesthetic in the Pompidou Center (1977) by
exposing major building systems on the exterior, painted in colors based on the
appropriate standard. The building industry also began to institute color standards for the
selection of building products and finishes.

The advent of Postmodernism in the 1960s returned the possibilities of color to
architectural design. Robert Venturi argued against modernism through a reinvigorated
interest in the complex, evocative, and ambiguous characteristics of architecture. His first
significant built work, the Vanna Venturi House (1964), was painted a disturbing olive
green, intentionally provoking arguments for and against the International Style’s “white”
architecture. Partnered with Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour, Venturi continued
to incorporate bold color patterns and iconography in building design, echoing the
graphic abstractions of pop art.

Other Postmodern architects began to use color profusely throughout their
work, highlighting building surfaces and elements with sometimes raucous
color combinations. Notable among these are Charles Moore (Piazza

d'Italia, 1975-78), Aldo van Eyck (Mothers’ House, 1973-78),


Arquitectonica (Spear House, 1976-78), and Michael Graves, who
abstracted the formal language of classical architecture and appropriated
its muted “Italian” colors—yellows, ochers, and terra-cottas—in his Port-

Arnoff Center for Design and Art,
University of Cincinnati, by Peter
Eisenman (1996)

© Mary Ann Sullivan

land Public Services Building (1980). British architect James Stirling repeatedly used a
signature yellow-green, which was applied to hand railings, window frames, and other
details in a number of building designs (Neue Staatsgalerie, 1977-84). Following earlier
work by Barragan, Ricardo Legorreta continued exploring abstractly modernist forms
covered in vibrant, saturated colors typical of the vernacular traditions in his native
Mexico (Solana, 1991).

As in the infrequent use of color in modernism, color in the Postmodern style was
most often employed to give articulation to building elements. This application of color
was more compositional than spatial because it tended to increase the contrast of
elements to one another—making their tectonics and organization more evident—rather
than manipulating space with the advancing and receding characteristics of colored
surfaces.

Frank Gehry choose materials and finishes with consistent color, applying them
individually to forms so that they could set off one another within a larger composition
(Winton Guest House, 1982-87). Peter Eisenman often returned to a palette of pastel
pinks, blues, and greens to distinguish various autonomous patterns in his deconstructed
forms, but in a somewhat programmed manner that suggested an abdication of subjective
color choice (Arnoff Center for Design and Art, 1988-96).


Though its scientific understanding grew enormously, color was rarely the subject of a
cogent space-making design methodology. With the exceptions of De Stijl and a few
singular buildings, this may remain the greatest unexplored possibility of 20th-century

architecture.
CHRISTOPHER MONSON

Arquitectonica (United States); Barragan, Luis (Mexico); Bauhaus;
Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Cuadra San
Crist6bal, Mexico; Cubism; De Stijl; Eisenman, Peter (United States); van
Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands); Gehry, Frank (United States); German
Pavilion, Barcelona (1929); Graves, Michael (United States); International
Style; Legoretta, Ricardo (Mexico); Moore, Charles (United States); Neue
Staatsgalerie, Stuttgart; Pompidou Center, Paris; Portland Public Services
Building, Portland, Oregon; Postmodernism; Rietveld, Gerrit
(Netherlands); Schréder-Schrader House (Utrecht); Scott Brown, Denise
(United States); Stirling, James (England); Taut, Bruno (Germany); Unite
d’Habitation (Marseilles); Vanna Venturi House, Philadelphia; Venturi,
Robert (United States)

Further Reading

Albers, Josef, | New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1963
Chevreul, Michel-Eugene, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1967
“Color Confessions by Contemporary Architects,” 51 (1994)

Conrads, Ulrich (editor), “De Stijl Manifesto V” by Cor van Eesteren, Theo van
Doesburg, and Gerrit Rietveld in translated by Michael Bullock, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990
Heer, Jan de, (Color in Architecture), Rotterdam: Uitgevergij 010, 1986

Itten, Johannes, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1969
Mahnke, Frank H., New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1987
Mondrian, Piet, New York: Documents of Modern Art, Wittenbon, 1947
Porter, Tom, New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1982
Riley, Charles A., Hanover, New Hampshire: University Press of New
England, 1975
Riiegg, Arthur (editor), (Le Corbusier’s Color Keyboards from 1931 and 1959),

Basell: Birkhauser, 1997
Swirnoff, Lois, | New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1986
Venturi, Robert, 2nd edition, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977

COLQUHOUN, ALAN 1921-

Architect and historian, England

Determined to sustain the humane possibilities of architecture in a world without the
master narratives of cultural authority and universal history, Alan Colquhoun has made
rigorous contributions to the discipline as a theorist, writer, critic, and architect.
Throughout the 1950s he was, according to Reyner Banham in “one of the guardians
of the intellectual conscience of his generation of London architects” (1966). As an
architect working in London, he was one of the earliest modernists to submit the clichés
of modernism to functional and contextual critique in the hope of redefining architecture
after the death of neoclassical repetition and the birth of ahistorical relativism.

Colquhoun’s earliest connection was to the architects of a nascent movement called
Brutalism (sometimes referred to as the New Brutalists) that was pioneered in England by
Peter and Allison Smithson as an aesthetic response to the country’s desire to rebuild
after World War II using the heroic model of Mies van der Rohe’s brand of modernism.
Although the term “brutalism’” suffers somewhat from negative associations with
ugliness, severity, and a generally unpleasant form of modernism, the Smith-sons’
original aspirations for the style were rooted in a purist, truth-to-materials aesthetic. The
Brutalists’ rejection of provincial English architecture that Banham had criticized as
“whimsical” would be measured by International Style standards, modernist forms, and
classicism, as exemplified in their embrace of Mies, Le Corbusier, and Gerrit Rietveld.
Colquhoun’s early work and thought, however, have sometimes been referred to as a
more refined Brutalism in that he allowed many demands of context to mitigate the
starkness traditionally associated with brutalism. He could now be called a Postmodernist
if one interpreted, in his words, “the postmodern to mean not only the revival of historical
forms, but all those tendencies, apparently within modernism itself, that have modified its
original content” (Colquhoun, 1989, ix). For Colquhoun there is no final or completed
order to architecture, as any history leads to the object and activity of criticism.
Colquhoun is committed to a critical and didactical engagement with architecture that
fully incorpo-rates the claim that no one, including himself, can offer a final argument
from a final (universal) perspective.

Beginning in the middle of the 20th century, Colquhoun’s writing explores the
problems presented to architects by historical repetition and functional logic, problems
that he has recently approached from an anthropological and philosophical turn to
language. Colquhoun took pains to separate Modern architecture from the more purely
visual or “picturesque” transformations of the 19th century by pointing out the distance
from “Historicism,” a distance increased by the didactic demands of Modern architecture.
Early on, his critical interest was in the element of architecture that defined its connection
to its age—that is, he wanted to know what it was that generated style in 20th-century
architecture. Colquhoun explicitly linked this style to the function of the building such
that “the visual hierarchy always reflects a functional hierarchy, an understanding of
which intensifies the aesthetic pleasure derived from the forms.” His later work expanded

this notion with the assertion that there did not exist any singular style for any one
context but there were “a multiplicity of ‘language games’ that may vary according to
circumstance” (Colquhoun, 1988, 5). His work has been influenced to some extent by
recent attention to language in social theory, particularly the works of the philosophers
Walter Benjamin, Claude Lévi-Strauss, and Jean-Frangois Lyotard. Colquhoun’s
discovery of a state of architectural affairs similar to the state of social science affairs
offers him ways to examine the world without relying on universal commitments or
teleological narratives.

Colquhoun’s early theoretical and architectural work focused on the role of function in
an attempt to conceptualize the building as a self-contained entity, the form of which was
created out of the internal requirements of the building itself. On the other hand, his later
work examines the question of the individual building as a part of larger spatial and
historical contexts. The use of historical typology, however, is typically less important
than concerns of logical function and abstraction.

Colquhoun’s architectural work followed a trend coeval with his theoretical and
critical work. He began his architectural career as a detail assistant to Tom Ellis and
Lawrence Israel for the firm of Lyons, Israel and Ellis. There he worked on early
Brutalist buildings, such as a workshop and scene-painting building for the Old Vic
Theater in South London. In 1961 he formed a partnership with John Miller. In 1975
Richard Brearley became a partner, and Su Rogers became one in 1987, the year that the
firm’s name was changed from Colquhoun and Miller to the more descriptive Colquhoun,
Miller and Partners. In the 1960s the firm’s work focused on medium- to large-size
public buildings, and by 1970 public housing comprised the largest part of their work.
During the 1980s their work focused on museums, including their renovation work on
Whitechapel Art Gallery in London that improved and reinterpreted the building’s
already diverse elements with a concern for the historical, social, and contextual fabric of
the building’s exterior and the functional utility of the building’s interior.

CHAR MILLER
Banham, Reyner (United States); Brutalism; Smith-son, Peter and Alison

(England)

Selected Publications
New York: Rizzoli, 1981

(with John Miller), Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1988
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1989

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, London: The Architectural Press, 1966

COLUMBUS, INDIANA, UNITED STATES

In many respects, Columbus, Indiana, is a typical small town of the American Midwest
with a population of only 32,000 and a single company dominating its economic and
civic life. Its main street, laid out in 1821, retains much of its 19th-century character, as
does its most visible public building, the Victorian Bartholomew County Courthouse
(1874) on the town square. However, Columbus also possesses one of the densest
concentrations of modern architecture in the United States, with more than 50 buildings
designed by internationally known firms.

Columbus’ involvement with modern architecture is due largely to the patronage of
J.Irwin Miller, the (now retired) chairman of Cummins Engine Company. Miller was
exposed to modernism as an undergraduate at Yale University, where he developed an
enthusiast’s interest in architecture and a belief in its potential to express the spirit of a
community. In 1937, when his uncle and aunt donated land in downtown Columbus for
their congregation’s new church, Miller persuaded his relatives to give the commission to
Eliel Saarinen, whose Cranbrook School of Art had deeply impressed him. Saarinen’s
First Christian Church (1942) is a restrained, boxlike structure of buff brick with a
gridded limestone facade and a detached, shaftlike campanile. Furnishings for the church
were designed by Saarinen’s son Eero (Miller’s classmate at Yale) and Charles Eames.
The church’s departure from its predecessor’s Gothic Revival style caused local
controversy on its completion, but eventually Columbus became receptive to modern
architecture.

Miller continued to press the cause of modern architecture in the following decades,
commissioning Eero Saarinen to design a series of buildings, including the North
Christian Church and his own house. The church is a simple geometric composition of
concrete and slate. Its hexagonal form, symbolizing unity, is articulated in steel by
prominent roof ribs that rise to form a spire marking the centralized sanctuary within. The
Miller house, one of Saarinen’s few residential commissions, features a transformable
open plan, a conversation pit, and plastic “scoop” dining chairs designed for the house.
Saarinen also designed a new branch and central office for Miller’s family’s bank. The
Irwin Union Bank and Trust (1954) was the first example of Miesian modernism in
Columbus. Although its steel frame and transparent glass facade defied small-town
expectations for a bank, its open plan and cageless teller stations were welcomed by
patrons for their friendliness and informality. Subsequent Irwin Union branches and
office additions were designed by Harry Weese (1958) and Roche Dinkeloo (1973).

Under Miller’s aegis these firms also designed buildings for the Cummins Engine
Company, including factories, offices, and research facilities. Roche Dinkeloo’s
Components Plant (1973) maximized manufacturing flexibility and productivity while
enhancing the work environment for the plant’s 2,000 employees. Designing a 13-acre
glass-and-steel shed set in a parklike campus, the architects utilized innovative air and
noise pollution control systems and provided extensive views to the exterior. To avoid
marring these views, the architects accommodated automobiles on the plant’s roof. When
the design was exhibited at the Museum of Modern Art in 1970, it was hailed as a
prototype for the factory of the future. Roche Dinkeloo’s corporate office complex (1984)
for Cummins was as significant for its location as for its design. Determined to make


downtown Columbus continually relevant to the life of the city, Miller chose to locate
Cummins World Headquarters on three square blocks in the central business district
rather than on the urban periphery. A long arc of a building with a sawtooth east facade
embracing a public park, it is flanked by a covered public walkway that connects with
nearby structures (post office, bank, and shopping mall) used by employees. The Roche
Dinkeloo design also included the renovation of a brick building from 1881 that was part
of the original garage and machine shop where the Cummins diesel engine was born.

The renovation of this building reflected architecture’s burgeoning interest in adaptive
reuse as well as Miller’s own awareness of his company’s local historical significance.
As early as the 1960s, Miller hired Alexander Girard to renovate his family’s 1881 Irwin
Bank building to house his private offices. Although the interior was thoroughly
modernized, the building’s castiron-and-brick facade was restored to approximately its
original appearance. This renovation was part of a master revitalization plan that Girard
prepared for the Columbus Redevelopment Commission. Focusing on a ten-block area of
downtown Columbus that had declined in the 1950s because of suburban retail
competition, Girard preserved the Victorian character of the district while adapting it for
contemporary use, introducing coherent signage and color coordination across the
corridor’s storefronts. This revitalization effort was given added impetus by the
construction of the Courthouse Center and Commons (1973), a Miller-financed shopping
and civic complex. Occupying a superblock site along Washington Street, the complex
was designed by Cesar Pelli to minimize its obtrusive scale by respecting the cornice
lines of nearby buildings. Its brown mirrored glass sheathing gives way on the
Washington Street facade to clear glass, better connecting the enclosed commons with
the life of the street. Inside is a Jean Tinguely sculpture fabricated of metal scraps
collected from the Columbus area. This work is the focal point of the complex, serving as
a popular public gathering place, thus satisfying Miller’s desire that the Commons add
vitality to downtown and become a contemporary equivalent to the town’s original public
plaza, namely, the courthouse square immediately to the south.

Miller’s direct patronage brought a substantial amount of modern
architecture to Columbus, but of even greater impact was the architectural
program that he established through the Cummins Engine Foundation in
1954. Alarmed that post-World War II business and population expansion
was negatively affecting Columbus’ built environment and its quality of
life, Miller proposed to improve both. His foundation would pay the
architect’s fees for any civic building in Columbus, provided that the
designer be chosen from a list of six approved architects. That list,
supplied by the foundation but compiled by an anonymous panel of
national experts, is continually revised to include the names of architects
appropriate for a specific project. There are no other restrictions, and the
foundation distances itself from the selection and design process, declining
to meet the chosen

Gateway Study for Columbus, Indiana
(1991), designed by Venturi Scott
Brown and Associates

© Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates

__r

an

St. Peter’s Lutheran Church, designed
by Gunnar Birkerts, Columbus,
Indiana (1988), interior Photo © Mary
Ann Sullivan

architect until his or her fee is paid. The Columbus School Board was the first local body
to accept the foundation’s offer, selecting Harry Weese to design the Lillian Schmitt
Elementary School (1957). Subsequent schools were designed by Norman Fletcher and

The Architects Collaborative (1962), Edward Larrabee Barnes (1965), Gunnar Birkerts
(1967), John Johansen (1969), Eliot Noyes (1969), Mitchell-Giurgola (1972), Hardy,
Holman, Pfieffer (1972), Caudill Rowlett Scott (1973), and Richard Meier (1982).
Stylistically diverse—including concrete bunkers, megastructures, programmatic clusters,
high-tech imagery, and neoindustrial forms—these buildings demonstrate a broad range
of postwar modernism.

Other public buildings financed by the Cummins architectural program include
Venturi and Rauch’s Fire Station No. 4 (1967), which responds to the surrounding
commercial vernacular through consciously banal design, signage, and materials; Roche
Dinkeloo’s Columbus Post Office (1972), the nation’s first designed by privately paid
architects and notable for its use of salt-glazed tiles (typical of midwestern grain silos)
and Cor-ten steel; Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s City Hall (1981), with a concave glass
facade set back from elongated brick cantilevers framing the entrance; and Don Hisaka’s
Law Enforcement Building (1991), designed in a neo-Victorian manner with brickwork
and stone trim matching that of the adjacent courthouse. Since the architecture program’s
inception, the Cummins Engine Foundation has spent nearly $15 million in design fees
for more than 30 buildings. Although critics have complained that the program produces
expensive buildings and favors high-style designers over local architects, it is generally
regarded as a success. The program has been cited as a model of innovative public/
private partnership, garnering praise from the National Building Museum, the American
Institute of Architects, and the Pritzker Prize.

The impact of the Cummins architectural program has extended beyond the individual
buildings that it has subsidized. It has contributed to an unprecedented level of
architectural awareness and design excellence throughout Columbus, evident in the
award-winning buildings erected without foundation support. These include I.M.Pei’s
Cleo Rogers Memorial Library (1969), which engages Saarinen’s First Christian Church
across a new public plaza; Gunnar Birkerts’ St. Peter’s Lutheran Church (1988), whose
congregation selected Birkerts because they admired his Cummins-financed design for a
nearby school; Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s plant for newspaper (1971), with its
printing equipment dramatically revealed behind a transparent facade; and Caudill
Rowlett Scott’s switching center for Indiana Bell Telephone (1978), with its colorful
street-level shafts. The latter two are fine examples of light indus-trial buildings
sensitively designed as neighborhood enhancements.

Although many of Columbus’ modern buildings are architectural landmarks, none
exist as isolated monuments. Rather, housing the everyday institutions of the town, these
buildings are an integral part of daily life. Taken together, they present a cohesive portrait
of postwar architecture and planning, documenting changes in modernism and
Postmodernism, urban renewal and historic preservation, and public policy and civic
awareness and demonstrating the social benefits of good design.

GABRIELLE ESPERDY
Barnes, Edward Larrabee (United States); Birkerts, Gunnar (United
States); Pei, LM. (United States); Roche, Kevin, and John Dinkeloo
(United States); Saarinen, Eero (Finland); Saarinen, Eliel (Finland);

Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (United States)


Further Reading

The individual buildings of Columbus, Indiana, have been extensively written about in
architectural journals. On the town of Columbus and its modern buildings as a group, the
literature is substantial but introductory and popular, rather than analytic.
Antonelli, Paola, “An Architecture Collection,” (March 1994)
Columbus, Indiana: Visitors Center, 1974; 6th edition, 1991
Dana, Amy, “Revving Up to Quality,” (May 1990)
Freeman, Allen, “Living in an Architectural Museum,” 69 (March 1980)
Glick, Jean Flora, “Camelot in the Cornfields,” (October 1988)
Goldberger, Paul, “Prairie Showplace,” —_ (4 April 1976)
Smith, G.E.Kidder, 3 vols., Garden City, New York: Anchor Press, 1981 (see
especially volume 2, )
Taylor, Robert M., Jr., Indianapolis: Indiana Historical Society, 1989

COMPETITIONS

Throughout the 20th century professional architectural competitions were a constant
source of debate and controversy among those in the discipline. They were used as
pedagogical tools, as means for determining excellence, as a method for awarding
commissions, as battlegrounds of opposing ambitions, and as political tools.
Competitions can discover new talent, challenge contemporary ideas about architecture,
and involve the general public in a dialogue. As an institution within the practice of
architecture, they are also capable of reflecting contemporary or predicting future trends.

The most common types of architectural design competitions are idea competitions
and project competitions. Project competitions imply an intention and a commitment to
build, whereas idea competitions are promoted as theoretical exercises in design intended
primarily to promote discussion and attract awareness to a particular issue. An idea
competition is most beneficial for dealing with problems with a broad social interest,
exploring different ways of using a building material, bringing attention to the potentials
of a site, or examining new approaches to a particular building form or type.

Competitions can also be open, limited, or invited and conducted in one or two stages.
Open competitions are used for selecting an architect or firm for a real project. They can
be done in one or two stages, and the client retains the right to modify the winning
design. In the case of a two-stage competition, the purpose of the first stage is to narrow
the field, and the winner is selected in the second stage. The benefit of a two-stage
process is the opportunity for the architect to engage the client in a dialogue, an option
not usually available in an open competition. Disadvantages of the open competition
process include the risk of choosing an inexperienced architect, the possibility of
receiving far too many submissions for the jury to evaluate adequately, the expense borne
by the individual firms or architects who participate, and the selection of a project that is
not economically viable to build.


In the case of an invited or limited competition, a few architects or firms are
commissioned to submit designs and customarily are paid an honorarium for their
participation. This type of competition is often used when it is important for the sponsor
to obtain a limited number of solutions from qualified competitors.

Often, one of the first steps a sponsor takes in the competition process is the selection
of a professional adviser to act as a competition consultant. The adviser, a qualified
professional, is paid by the sponsor to advise on every aspect related to staging the
competition. The professional adviser is expected to act as an impartial liaison between
the client or sponsor and the competitors and to ensure that the competition is executed in
a fair and equitable manner for both the client and the competitors. The adviser also
assists the jury in their understanding of the competition program.

In an effort to ensure an open and fair competition process, many countries have
adopted competition regulations and guidelines. The American Institute of Architects
(AIA) issued its “Guidelines for Architectural Design Competitions” in 1976 (a revision
of its 1972 code, which required AIA approval and participation in competitions). The
AIA document is divided into the following seven parts: General Advantages and
Disadvantages of Competitions, Definitions and Classifications, General Principles for
the Conduct of Competitions, The Role of the Professional Adviser and Other Details for
the Conduct of Competitions, The Jury and Judging Guidelines, Costs and Time, and
Suggested Form of Architectural Design Competition Program.

For international competitions there is the “Regulations for International
Competition in Architecture and Town Planning” of the Union
Internationale des Architectes (UIA), published in 1974. The stated
purpose of the UIA regulations is to outline the principles on which
international competitions are based. The regulations are divided into two
basic parts. The first consists of 51 articles divided into the following
sections: General Provisions; Professional Adviser; Drawing Up the
Conditions; UIA Approval; Registration of Competitors; Prizes,
Honoraria, and Mentions; Insurance; Copyright and Right of Ownership;
and Exhibition of Entries and Return of Designs. The second part includes
instructions and recommendations to promoters.

Chicago Tribune Tower (1922)

One of the most significant 20th-century competitions was for the new office tower.
An announcement for the open, international competition appeared in major American
and European newspapers, in professional journals, and in the national and international
editions in June 1922.

In a sense this was a two-stage competition, as in addition to the open entries, ten
architects were invited to participate for a fee of $2000 each. The invited architects were
to be judged with the ten best projects chosen from the more than 200 submissions
received, the majority of which were from the United States. From this group of 20, three
were to be awarded prize money of $50,000, $20,000, and $10,000. The composition of

the jury (one architect, Alfred Granger, AIA, and four members of the Tribune Building
Corporation) was a source of criticism by the AIA, which felt that the jury was heavily
weighted on the side of the layperson.

From the outset the competition was highly publicized and extremely well
documented. At the conclusion of the competition, the sponsored a touring exhibition of
the perspective renderings to universities, public institutions, and office buildings. The
publicity was intended to promote the as a newspaper committed to such lofty values as
public education. In fact, during the period that the competitors were working on their
submissions, the ran a series of weekly articles on the subject of historic and modern
architecture that might have influenced some of the participants.

An important outcome of this competition was the exposure of a mass
audience to modern architecture during the exhibition’s 27-city tour of the
United States and Canada. It was also a demonstration of the benefit of the
competition process even to the so-called losers, as they profited from the
exposure as well. In fact, it is often noted that Eliel Saarinen’s second-
place design (the last entry received) was regarded more highly than the
more traditional, winning design of Howells and Hood.

League of Nations (1926)

The open, international competition of 1926 for the League of Nations Building in
Geneva is generally regarded as a disaster in the history of 20th-century competitions.
The building was intended to symbolize the effort to achieve greater international
harmony and world peace, objectives that were to be reflected in the architecture.
Politically charged from the outset, the initial jury of six men represented six different
countries. Soon the jury grew to nine, with the result that three additional countries were
represented (all Western European).
When the jury evaluated the 377 entries, they were unable to come to consensus on a
winner. Most of the designs were deemed too expensive to build, and only Le Corbusier
and Pierre Jeanneret had stayed within the budget. Problems with their drawings kept
them from being named the winners. As a result each of the nine jury members chose a
winner and two runners-up. None of the 27 architects nominated received more than one
vote. Nine architects representing five different countries shared first prize. Immediately,
Le Corbusier embarked on an unsuccessful campaign to convince the jury that his design
should win.
The League of Nations intervened at this point, and a second round was scheduled
with five jury members who did not represent any of the prize-winning countries. They
too found the winners’ design unsuitable. However, two voted for Le Corbusier and two
for Vago. As a compromise four of the winners (all traditionalists) were commissioned to
produce another new design.
In the meantime a sizable donation from the Rockefellers necessitated the
search for a larger building site. When one was located, permission

depended on the signature of Héléne de Madrot, the host of the 1928


meeting where the Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne
(CLAM) was founded. She said that her permission was contingent on all
the prize winners having the chance to submit new designs for the site. In
addition, Le Corbusier would be allowed to clarify his design. Only Le
Corbusier and Erich zu Putlitz took advantage of the opportunity, yet the
jury decided to stand by their earlier decision. This competition is
generally regarded as an example of the battle between the modernists and
the traditionalists as well as a competition plagued by nationalistic
allegiances.

Sydney Opera House (1956)

Despite such problems as drastically escalating construction costs, conflicting political
ambitions, and the fact that the winning architect ultimately abandoned the project, the
Sydney Opera House is today the much admired symbol of both Sydney and Australia.
The competition was initiated by J.J.Cahill, prime minister of New South Wales, in an
attempt to garner votes for the Labour Party.

In 1956 an open international competition was organized. Two hundred and thirty-
three designs, all line drawings as required by the program, were submitted. The jury
included Gobden Parkes, head of the Public Works Department, and three architects:
J.L.Martin of Cambridge University, Henry Ingham Ashworth of Australia, and Eero
Saarinen of the United States.

The winner, Jorn Utzon, had worked for and been influenced by both
Alvar Aalto and Frank Lloyd Wright. Previous to the competition, his
projects had consisted primarily of single-family residences. His
inexperience became evident when he attempted to solve the problem of
the construction of the roof shell structure. Eventually, under time
constraints and political pressure, he resigned in 1966, relinquishing the
project to Australians Peter Hall, David Littlemore, and Lionel Todd.

Boston City Hall (1962)

This open, two-stage competition for a new city hall and surrounding public open spaces
was sponsored by the Government Center Commission of the City of Boston. The
competition was announced in October 1961. Deadlines for the preliminary stage were 17
January 1962 and for the final stage 25 April 1962. The jury announced their decision on
4 May 1962. This competition is generally considered a successful example of an open
competition because of its extraordinarily complete program and the establishment in
1958 of the Government Center Commission, which included representatives from the
government, the business community, the architectural profession, and the building

trades. This commission was charged with the task of developing the program for the
competition.

Although the actual building itself has been a source of criticism by its
users and others, the competition was exemplary for its fair and
democratic urban practice for design. There was no evidence of political
favoritism, and the competition provided the opportunity for a young,
relatively unknown firm, Kallmann, McKinnell, and Knowles, to give the
city an extraordinary design. More important, the Boston City Hall
competition restored faith in the competition process in general.

Centre Nationale d’ Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou (1971)

This competition is notable for its effect on architecture in general. With 681 proposals,
at the time it was the most widely entered in the history of architectural design
competitions. Officially commissioned by the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, the project
was actually initiated by French President Georges Pompidou, who wanted to be
remembered after the end of his seven-year term of office. The program was for a
complex that could accommodate all forms of art and, perhaps more important, draw
large numbers of visitors.

Among others the jury included architects Philip Johnson, Oscar Niemeyer, and Jorn
Utzon. When it came time for the jury to assess the projects, Utzon was absent for health
reasons. To maintain the international character of the jury, he was replaced by Herman
Liebaers, Belgian director of the Royal Library in Brussels, and not by the original
reserve jury member, French architect Henri-Pierre Maillard. In a nearly unanimous vote,
the design of Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers was selected as the winner. The entry was
cited for its use of only half the available site, the flexibility of the interior, and the
transparency of the exterior.

Unfortunately, the enthusiasm of the jury was not shared by the public. Protests began
as soon as the jury decision was announced and lasted for several years. A group of
French architects even went so far as to attempt, through legal channels, to prevent the
design from ever being built. That they were unsuccessful in these attempts is a tribute to
President Pompidou, who himself was less than enamored of the project initially yet
stood by the expertise of his jury. The jury was correct in noting that architecture was
“entering a phase the effects of which will not be confined to France but which will make
themselves felt throughout the world.”

The competition was to have a lasting effect on architecture in Paris. Expanding on
Pompidou’s example, when Francois Mitterand became president of France in 1981, he
initiated a series of competitions that resulted in the Grands Projets (Grand Projects).

Although architectural design competitions remain a source of controversy, they
continue to be held because they provide many benefits despite drawbacks such as the
cost of the competition to the client and to the profession, the possibility of selecting an
inexperienced architect, and the absence of a dialogue between the client and the
architect. They are an excellent source for discovering new talent and provide a venue for
exploring new methods for conceiving architecture. They are usually able to maintain the

focus on design rather than on other aspects of the architectural process. Competitions
can also stimulate a public dialogue.

Although the major 20th-century architectural design competitions are too numerous
to mention, many significant ones include Stockholm Town Hall (1902-05); Helsinki
Railway Station (1903); Peace Palace, The Hague (1905); Nebraska State Capitol (1919);
the Chicago Tribune Tower (1922); the Lincoln Memorial, Washington, D.C. (1922);
League of Nations, Geneva (1926-27); Palace of the Soviets, Moscow (1931); Jefferson
National Expansion Memorial, Washington, D.C. (1946); Termini Station, Rome (1947);
Sydney Opera House (1956-57); Brasilia Urbanization Plan (1956-57); Toronto City
Hall (1958); FDR Memorial, Washington, D.C. (1960); Lawrence Hall of Science,
University of California, Berkeley (1962); Congress Building, Kyoto (1962); University
of California Arts Center, Berkeley (1965); NASA Kennedy Space Center, Cape
Canaveral, Florida (1965); San Francisco Civic Center Plaza, California (1965);
Amsterdam Town Hall (1967); Yale University Mathematics Building, New Haven,
Connecticut (1970); American Pavilion, Osaka World’s Fair (1970); Georges Pompidou
National Center of Art and Culture (1971); High Court of Australia, Canberra (1972-73);
Roosevelt Island Housing, New York (1975); Minnesota II (Capitol Building Annex,
1976-77); Park de la Villette, Paris (1976); Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank (1979); La
Cité des Sciences et de I’Industrie, Paris (1980); Vietnam Veterans Memorial,
Washington, D.C. (1980-81); Grande Arche de La Défense, Paris (1982); Opéra Bastille,
Paris (1982); Ministry of Finance, Paris (1982); The Peak, Hong Kong (1982); Carré
d’Art, Nimes (1984); New National Theater, Tokyo (1984); Shonandai Culture Center,
Fujisawa (1985); Metropolitan Hall, Tokyo (1985); Brooklyn Museum of Art, New York
(1986); City Hall, The Hague (1986); Tokyo Opera House (1986); Houston Museum of
Fine Arts, Texas (1987); Media Park, Cologne (1987); Jewish Museum, Berlin (1988);
Kansai Airport, Japan (1988); Center for Japanese Culture, Paris (1989); Chicago Public
Library, Illinois (1991); the Reichstag, Berlin (1993); and the McCormick Tribune
Campus Center at Illinois Institute of Technology (1998).

LINDA HART
Boston City Hall; Grande Arche de La Défense, Paris; Jewish Museum,
Berlin; Kansai International Airport Terminal, Osaka; Lincoln Memorial,
Washington, D.C.; Pompidou Center, Paris; Reichstag, Berlin; Sydney
Opera House; Tribune Tower International Competition (1922), Chicago

Further Reading

edited by Héléne Lipstadt, New York: Princeton Architectural Press,
1989
Chicago Tribune Tower Competition, New York: Rizzoli, 1980
de Haan, Hilde, and Ids Haagsma, with essays by Dennis Sharp and Kenneth
Frampton, New York: Thames and Hudson, 1988
de Jong, Cees, and Erik Mattie, Taschen, 1994
de Jong, Cees, and Erik Mattie, Taschen, 1994

Lipstadt, Héléne, “Architectural Publications, Competitions and Exhibitions,” in
edited by Eve Blau and Edward Kaufman, Cambridge, Massachussetts: MIT Press,
1989
Lipstadt, Héléne, “The Experimental Tradition,” in edited by Héléne Lipstadt, New
York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1989

Nasar, Jack L., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999
Silver, Nathan, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1994
Strong, Judith, London: Butterworth Architecture, 1996

COMPUTERS AND ARCHITECTURE

To realize an example of architecture, the object must be described. However, this in
itself is insufficient—the process of realizing the object must itself be supported. It is in
both these dimensions that computers have been of benefit in the practice of architecture
in the 20th century. The use of computers in architectural design has been motivated by a
number of factors and driven by others, and has come to reflect the evolution of practice
through the last half of the 20th century.

The work of an architect started the century relying heavily on teams of
colleagues, employees, consultants, and contractors; by the close of the
century, although the practice of architecture was much the same, the
picture had changed to include computing tools in almost every team and
every practice, drawing the participants closer together through the whole
sequence of events leading to the construction of a building. As this
change took place, the challenge with the use of computing tools came to
be recognized as the challenge of management, not technology.

Describing the Building

Buildings can be described in two ways. They can be described by performance
(including quantities), or they can be drawn. Initially, computers were seen as
manipulators of data in the simplest sense: calculators and organizers. Thus, when
computers were first made accessible to designers, it was largely in the areas of planning
and engineering that applications were first undertaken. In these fields, design could be
seen to rely on the handling of large data sets as well as the manipulation of equations in
the calculation of quantified results. More traditionally, a building is drawn: The
geometries of the building are set forth by means of lines, straight or curved, or volumes.
A second application of computers is in the creation and manipulation of graphics.

Although computers could be applied to data manipulation and calculation with more
simple interfaces of card readers and printers, architectural graphics required more
sophisticated user interfaces such as display screens and input devices supporting
pointing and drawing. Because the practice of architecture relies heavily on graphic
communication, the development of computer graphic devices was highly influential on
the spread of computer use in design. The evolution of computer graphics can therefore
be considered discretely when reviewing the history of computer-aided architectural
design.

Computer Graphics

The first implementation of such systems supporting what we might recognize as a
computer graphics system can be found in 1950, when MIT’s Whirlwind computer
system was used to support a refreshed vector screen for display of graphics. This system
can be considered a first-generation computer, running with vacuum tubes and
consuming considerable space and power. Limitations in the interfaces as well as cost-
effective access to computational systems meant that it was not until 1963 that Ivan E.
Sutherland presented _ the first full-fledged, operational computer-aided design system.
This system ran on second-generation TX-2 computers, using transistors for computation,
and refreshed vector displays and light pen for the user interface. Several other
implementations of computer graphic systems were developed in academic settings
during the early 1960s, leading to the conference “Architecture and the Computer” in
1964.

In late 1964 IBM demonstrated their DAC-1 system to support graphic interaction in
automobile design. From the introduction of this system came increasing use of
interactive computer-aided design systems by automobile and aerospace firms, so that by
end of the 1960s, commercial use of computer graphics was proven, although only in
applications that supported high-cost factors. The first computer graphic tool specifically
for architectural application was ARK-2, introduced in the early 1970s.

General use of computers in architectural design had to wait until the early 1980s,
when computer systems had reduced in cost by a factor yet again to make it feasible for
large practices to purchase workstations. The final impetus for widespread use of
computer graphics came when miniaturization of computer circuits was achieved and
computing systems dropped by yet another factor. The personal computer was introduced
(1982) and software developers provided tools that could be used in a normal office
environment at a lower cost. As hardware became cheaper and hence more accessible,
computers came to be widespread and were common tools in every design practice and
activity.

Software developed initially to describe buildings as threedimensional data models,
but as workstations became more common, users demanded simpler two-dimensional
descriptions for drawing, rather than digital modeling. As personal computers were
adopted in practice, the most popular computer tools in practice were drafting systems.
As the smaller workstations became more powerful, more complex software could be


developed for use on these cheaper platforms, and rendering and presentation software
became widely available. Initially capable of displaying only simple forms and colors,
these software systems evolved to portray lighting, surface textures, and colors more
accurately. By the 1990s such systems were being used in architectural practice to
prepare animations of design ideas for presentation to clients, regulators, and potential
users.

Traditionally, building designs are communicated visually by two-dimensional
descriptions, such as in drawings, as well as by three-dimensional descriptions, such as
models. From the start computer graphic systems supported three-dimensional
descriptions, although it was not easy to convert these to paper-based drawings.
Computer graphics thus came to be categorized into distinct tool sets: drawing tools in
which two-dimensional descriptions are created and virtual reality systems in which the
user interacts with three-dimensional representations. Some software avoids the problems
of full three-dimensional representation with simulating three-dimensional forms by
extruding two-dimensional shapes or assembling (as in a card model) two-dimensional
drawings in a three-dimensional space. Virtual reality systems have proved to be
cumbersome and overly complex for either designers or clients to use and, after 30 years
of development, have not yet realized the benefits anticipated in architectural design.

As computers came to be used in design, it was found to be possible to
describe forms digitally that may not be apparent or obtainable through
manual methods of working. For example, parametric design came to be
used—a method in which particular properties of a shape, dimensional or
otherwise, could be adjusted as the design progressed. If the parameters
were geometric, for example, the shape of a design might change
according to other properties such as time or capacity. Using these
computational attributes, designers have explored forms that are
sufficiently complex to require computer-driven digital output devices
such as robotic cutters or rapid prototyping machines. By use of these
devices, a more sculptural architecture came to be explored by the end of
the century (see, e.g., Gehry’s works from the late 1990s). These
sculptural forms also pushed the use of robotics in manufacturing of
architectural components.

Nongraphic Descriptions

Graphic descriptions of a building are not sufficient to erect or maintain a building. Many
aspects of design rely on quantitative analysis, such as the prediction of the energy
consumption of a particular design. These quantitative design procedures typically lend
themselves to automation and were the first type of design activity to which computers
were applied. Numerous computer programs have been written to help designers estimate

the cost of their design—its performance in various parameters such as energy, wind,
noise, and structural behavior, among others. Later, these nongraphic analyses came to be
integrated with graphics and the results of the calculations displayed on the digital model
of the building proposed. Thus, the results of a structural analysis program can be shown
with the building bending in digital wind.

The construction of a building is supported not only by drawings but also by textual
descriptions, such as specifications of tabular quantifications of materials (e.g., bills of
quantities). Computers are particularly useful in organizing and accessing large quantities
of data; that is, as database management tools. In early software developments,
applications were created that linked geometric descriptions to nongeometric
descriptions, permitting the generation of text descriptions directly from graphical
descriptions; for example, the automated printing of draft construction specifications.
With the recognition of the programmers that building design itself
represents only a small portion of the life cycle of a building, computers
have come to support facilities management through the remainder of the
life cycle, tracking building use and maintenance. Computers now are
extensively used in the management of buildings, both for monitoring and
operating particular equipment within a building (which processes
generate data that can be used in design analysis for subsequent designs)
and for tracking usage and scheduling maintenance and replacement of
elements.

Supporting the Process

The use of computer tools in architecture can be seen to track architectural theory in the
20th century, although perhaps time shifted by a few decades at the start. Initial
applications of computers were quantitative and focused on calculating answers to
specific questions arising in design. In the 1960s this application of computers fit well
with the attitude that design was a problem-solving task in which specific design
questions could be isolated and solved and the results integrated to produce a final
answer. Design could be considered an optimization of solution searching in a well-
defined problem space (see Simon 1981 for a particularly clear exposition of this
perspective). In this approach to design, the architect can structure the problem space and
inform the computer of the data to be considered, and the computer can search, through
calculation and data manipulation, all possible permutations of solutions and identify the
optimal answer. Computational tools were developed through the 1960s to solve
particular problems, such as needs analysis and schedules of accommodation,
minimization of energy consumption, optimization of space layouts, traffic flow analysis,
and plan layouts based on synthesis of quantified factors. Applications were used in
producing optimized standard plans for hospitals and schools, in designing industrialized
construction methods, and in planning new urban centers and housing areas.

After a decade or more of such use, it became obvious that approaching design as
segmented questions to be solved through individually optimized solutions did not
adequately address the broader synthetic aspects of successful design. At the same time,
computer tools had developed to the point that large databases could be stored for online
access and querying. Research in artificial intelligence has led to successful rule-based
computer programming tools to query databases and to simulate reasoning. This led to
design applications being developed to support knowledge-based design processes.
Drawing on successes in technical applications such as oil exploration, rule-based expert
systems were developed for architectural design. In these, expert knowledge and
reasoning processes were captured from successful designers and design domains to
create knowledge bases in particular. The shift to knowledge-based design reflected a
broader perception that architectural design needed to incorporate a wide range of issues,
not merely those expressible in simple computational terms.

The third fundamental shift in computer-aided architectural design came
about when the Internet provided widespread connectivity. Architectural
design has always been practiced in teams, requiring that team members
collaborate on the evolving description of a building and communicate
these descriptions to one another to ensure that all team members work
toward the same goal. By the mid-1990s such teams were commonly
communicating by sending data between team members on disks or tapes,
thereby bringing together the work of team members through the computer
and facilitating the division of work to permit concurrent activities. On the
advent of the Internet, communication moved away from physical media
and toward purely digital forms, allowing projects to be built with the
majority of communication in digital form. Thus, the computer and its
connectivity came to support the collaborative production of buildings,
bringing together not only architects but also consultants and contractors
and enabling team members to proceed on their own tasks while
maintaining close coordination of the parts.

Supporting the Business

The business of architecture has adapted to accommodate the use of computers. Tasks
and duties in architecture extend beyond design and include project management,
research, and construction administration. In these functions as well as design, computers
have come to be essential tools. For example, in construction administration Internet-
based communication enables the construction administrators to observe construction
progress using Web-cam video images transmitted from the site back to the office.
Robotics is being applied to particular construction projects to execute procedures not

easily carried out by hand, to speed up construction times, or to reduce the dangers to
which people are exposed on-site. Workers in remote site offices can access online
drawings and documentation as easily as their colleagues in the main office. Project
managers can access online current financial information and use this to complete
projects on budget and schedule. Using digital technologies, team members, including
clients, have been drawn together and coordination has been improved through better
communication. By the end of the century, several e-commerce web sites were actively
supporting design communication, component sourcing, and construction processes.

THOMAS KVAN

Further Reading

Mitchell, William J., New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977
Simon, Herbert, 2nd edition, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1981
Zampi, Giuliano, and Conway Lloyd Morgan, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995

CONCERT HALL, HALSINGBORG,
SWEDEN

Designed by Sven Markelius, completed 1932

The Halsingborg Concert Hall was built in 1932 on Drottning-gatan opposite St.
Jérgen’s Square. Hailed as a pioneering work of functionalism, it is also the first
monumental exponent of the modern style in Sweden. The long and complicated history
reflects changes that occurred in the first decades of the 20th century, not only
architecturally but also socially.

In 1911 a permanent orchestra was established in Halsingborg with its spa. In 1915 it
was suggested that the local authori ties should erect a society house (Borgarnas Hus)
with a concert space. Because public funding was not forthcoming, the industrialist
Henry Dunker suggested in 1916 a corporate venture; Dunker managed to secure a
majority of shares and became, in practice, the builder. Later, it gave him the possibility
to offer unflagging support for the radical new ideas of the architect.

From the outset two lines were represented in the building committee: the idea of a
multipurpose society house and the idea of a single-purpose concert hall. Initially, the
first idea came to influence the various projects proposed, whereas the latter idea won out
in the end. In 1918, on their own initiative, two young architects, Sven Markelius and
Olof Lundgren, submitted drawings for a hotel, including a concert space and assembly
rooms, that was never realized. They had already won an architectural competition for a
local residential area that only Markelius was commissioned to execute as his first
independent project.

In 1925 an architectural competition was announced for a society house containing a
concert hall, spa, assembly rooms, lecture halls, banqueting halls, and a movie theater.
Among the invited architects, Markelius appeared once more and was subsequently
awarded the commission.

Architecturally, the 1920s in Sweden are famed for their classicism, internationally
dubbed “Swedish Grace.” Following the lead of his former employer, Ivar Tengbom,
whose famous Stockholm Concert Hall was conceived in 1920 and inaugurated in 1926,
Markelius originally turned his eye to classical architecture to find his inspiration. The
main facade of his final winning contribution offered an austere prostyle Roman temple
front with columns of giant order based on the temple of Hadrian, thereby strongly
resembling its Stockholm forerunner. Even the rectangular ground plan for the concert
hall was based on classical precepts.

Meanwhile, social and cultural conditions changed. In response to this, Markelius
made new drawings in 1929-30. Jadelius has shown that he then felt that contemporary
needs were better served with a more anonymous, democratic architecture that did not
demand a classical humanistic education from its audience. Thus, when the project was
finalized, all traces of classicism had been stripped from the proposed building.
Professional critics were thrilled at the result, but locally there arose a furor, as the
architect had not bothered to inform the authorities of the change in formal character. In
the end the architect was sued but won in court because he had followed all legal
stipulations as to security and hygienic issues.

In keeping with the tenets of functionalism, the exterior form now emanated from the
bold plan, which was based on strict rationality and separation of functions. The building
was given an L shape, but with semicircles bulging out from each side of the entrance
wing. The latter part of the building contained three floors and was considerably lower
than the major wing, where the concert space and the movie theater below were housed.

The members of the audience were expected to arrive by car and enter the concert hall
under a cantilevered roof carried by straight pillars that was supposed to protect from
inclement weather. Tickets could be purchased in a specially designed space on the first
floor. The visitor would then proceed to the cloakrooms placed inside the semicircles,
whose very shape and organization were designed to facilitate an efficient decloaking and
a smooth flow toward the main vestibule preceding the concert hall. Originally, both a
restaurant and an outdoor cafe were intended for the audience, the former placed below
the cloakrooms and the latter on top of them on the roof. Eva Rudberg has pointed out
similarities between the larger auditorium and Alvar Aalto’s Finnish Theater (inaugurated
in 1928) in Abo.

Because music consumption had become the main purpose, the acoustics became of
paramount importance. Although in 1929 Markelius visited the paradigmatic Salle Pleyel,
built in 1927 to house the Paris orchestra, he chose to retain the rectangular form of the
concert hall rather than copying Lyon’s irregular plan based on bisecting parabolas. Still,
Lyon was contracted to aid him in improving the acoustics in Halsingborg. Even though
the acoustics turned out to be excellent, the rectangular plan was later criticized, as it was
regarded an unfortunate remnant of classical form. Therefore, the Halsingborg Concert
Hall did not gain followers in its interior arrangements, and the concert hall that was
erected in Gothenburg had other inspirational sources.


The exterior was highly acclaimed by the critics, with its stark, white concrete walls
enlivened by huge areas of glazing and the side buttressing necessary to support the roof
over the concert hall. In particular, the glazing of the entrance facade is a major feature,
intended to entice passersby into the building. From the outside one may follow the flow
of the entering welldressed audience until people vanish inside the concert space. This
spectacle was meant by the architect to create a living decorative effect, making any other
ornament superfluous. In other spaces, the glazing served the people inside the building,
as in the restaurant, where the opening of the wall offered a spectacular view over the sea.
Unfortunately, the dining room was felt to be discouragingly naked and simple and never
became a success. After only two years, this space was given over to the city library.
Despite this and other minor changes, the Halsingborg Concert Hall has not seen much
alteration and is still considered a masterpiece of the functionalist era.

BRITT-INGER JOHANSSON

Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Sweden

Further Reading

Jadelius, Lars, “Folk, form och funktionalism: Om allmant och gemensamt i
offentlighetens arkitektur—Med utgangspunkt fran Halsingborgs Konserthus,” Ph.D.
diss., Chalmers Tekniska Hégskola, 1987
Rudberg, Eva, Stockholm: Arkitktur Forlag, 1989; as edited by Olof Hultin,
translated by Roger Tanner, Stockholm: Arkitektur Férlag, 1989

CONCRETE

It is difficult if not impossible to imagine the 20th century without concrete. Surely the
landscape of modernity and modernization would be unrecognizable without it. By 1900
concrete may indeed have been considered modern, but as pointed out by technical
manuals throughout the century, it was by no means a new material. Ancient builders put
it to use, most notably the Romans, who built walls (faced with brick) and arcuated spans
(the 145-foot span of the Pantheon’s dome the most famous and well-preserved
example). This classical pedigree appealed to many architects of the early 20th century,
although modern concrete practice had more recent origins. Europeans experimented
with it in the 18th century, when the English engineer John Smeaton used a form of
hydraulic cement (a cement that hardens underwater) to rebuild the wall and lighthouse at
Eddy-stone off the Cornwall coast in 1756. The French began their own experiments
some 30 years later, using a combination of clay and cement from limestone. Louis Vicat
perfected hydraulic cement around 1800, and by 1850 Joseph Monier was producing
concrete flowerpots and sewer pipes using wire mesh and timber molds. In 1824 the
English bricklayer John Aspdin invented a type of cement dubbed “Portland,” after the
stone it resembled. This high-strength variety proved crucial, for it became, and remains,

the standard binding agent in the concrete used today. Portland cement was exported to
the United States at the end of the American Civil War, and as in much of Europe,
concrete frame structures were constructed for a variety of industrial uses. Particularly
valuable for fireproof attributes, concrete effectively insulated the iron or steel embedded
within. In some places, such as the American northeast, they were a relatively common
sight by the start of the 20th century. By 1887 the French engineer and building
entrepreneur Fran¢ois Hennebique patented a host of techniques for embedding steel bars
in concrete.

How best to utilize concrete and how to appreciate and interpret its
cultural meaning remained one of the more interesting and politically
volatile architectural debates of the century. This ongoing state of flux
involved more than technical development. By the end of World War II
engineers, architects, builders, and others helped develop concrete as a
common building material across the globe. From great hope to corporate
or state-induced eyesore, perhaps no other material would be perceived in
so many contrasting ways during the 20th century. One of several
materials embraced by avant-garde architects for its revolutionary
prospects, critics would come to vilify the material, associating it with the
oppressive characteristics of modern power structures. Through it all the
material maintained a pragmatic usefulness.

Technical Aspects

Concrete is a composite material produced by mixing a paste of cement and water with
inert materials called aggregates. Because concrete is mixed and poured, it is well suited
for molds and can be molded around reinforcing steel, a practice so common that by 1900
nearly all concrete structures were reinforced in some way by steel hidden from view.
The first ingredient, cement paste, is the binding agent, and a number of different types
were developed throughout the century. Consisting of Portland cement and water, this
paste hardens via a curing process called hydration. The second ingredient, aggregates,
varies considerably in size from sand particles to 3-inch rocks mixed with the paste.
Lightweight varieties of concrete substitute these aggregates for expanded shale, slate, or
slag to reduce the finished product’s weight. Because concrete’s usefulness is
complicated by its own dead load, a variety of engineers and builders have sought
inventive alternatives. One of the more unusual experiments was conducted by the
American architect Bernard May-beck (1923), who sought a low-cost remedy for the
housing shortage after a fire devastated a portion of Berkeley, California. In a clothes-
washing drum he combined cement paste, water, and sand; added some chemicals; and
after mixing the concoction he dipped burlap sacks into the tank and pasted them onto
wooden wall studs to form a concrete cladding. Calling this technique Bubble Stone for

its unique appearance, Maybeck boasted that home owners could use it themselves
because an average man could lift a hay-bale-sized chunk of this “stone” above his head.

Well-made concrete enjoys significant resistance to compression, but unlike steel it
has little strength against tensile stress. The compressive strength of concrete is primarily
based on the ratio of water to cement. Experiments both in the field and in laboratories
led engineers in an ongoing effort to increase the material’s strength and decrease curing
time. Generally speaking, the smaller the ratio of water to cement paste (i.e., the less
water compared to cement paste), the stronger the concrete.

Once mixed, concrete is poured into molds called formwork, which may vary from a
hole dug out of the earth for a foundation, to wood boards bolted together, to fiberglass
panels. In some cases an entire substructure of forms must be constructed, itself a self-
supporting structure requiring careful design and inspection by engineers and contractors.
In order to ensure a more controlled mixing process, concrete elements are often poured
in a factory or in a semiremote location on the building site set aside for the purpose. The
pour is crucial because laborers must work the paste and aggregates evenly throughout
the formwork so that they do not shift prelaid rebar out of its intended positions. Pipes
and conduits that must pass through the finished concrete must be set into position prior
to the pour as well and remain undisturbed by laborers’ efforts to fill the forms. As the
mix is spread within the formwork, laborers must ensure that all voids are filled and that
the aggregate is evenly distributed. The more fluid the mix, that is, the greater the ratio of
water to cement paste, the more workable the pour. Increasing the water makes for easier
construction, but weakens compressive strength. In colder climates air-entraining agents
are often added to increase workability and resistance to the heaving resulting from water
turning to ice.

Concrete must be mixed for a sustained period of time, so that the finished product
exhibits the properties of strength and durability designed by engineers. The development
and widespread marketing of gasoline-powered automobiles and trucks have had an
influence in the mixing process, especially in the United States. The truck was both a
prerequisite and a consequence of the parallel development of concrete construction.
Improvements in road construction, a development that was facilitated by the concrete
industry, in turn facilitated the widespread acceptance of the automobile. Likewise, the
cement-mixing gasoline-powered truck is ideally suited to concrete construction because
while en route from the factory the truck mixes the cement paste, water, and aggregates
in a revolving drum. Once poured and left to remain still, concrete sets in up to three
days, then cures for usually one month, depending on the type of ingredients in the
mixture and the climatic conditions at the site or factory. After engineers determine the
concrete is strong enough to support its own weight, laborers remove the formwork for
reuse at the next pour. In cold conditions curing concrete must be covered to ensure the
temperature necessary for developing a designed compressive strength. Curing is a
chemical process (not a process of desiccation) in which water reacts with the cement
paste and generates heat. Although hydration can occur even when concrete is
underwater, even well-made concrete is not completely watertight. Over time exposed
surfaces tend to absorb water that can pass into imterior space. Other liabilities were
discovered throughout the century, such as the material’s poor insulating properties and
the particularly dangerous problem called creep. Horizontal concrete structural members
(slabs and beams) develop the tendency to gradually deflect over long periods of time,


and this can become so severe as to make buildings uninhabitable. Structural engineers
devised prestressing strategies to counter this creeping deflection.

Properties of strength and workability have not monopolized
experimentation. Designers and builders have devised myriad ways of
altering the construction process to obtain specific aesthetic effects.
Various admixtures, especially those added at the end ofa pour, have been
used to alter the color of the finished material. Paolo Soleri experimented
with using mounds of sand as a formwork in building concrete shells and
half domes in the Arizona desert, even using the red and yellow color of
the local sand and clay as part of the cement paste and aggregate mixture
(Arcosanti, 1970). These colors were transferred to the finished product.
The subtractive volume of the formwork, and even the texture of its
interior surfaces, has absorbed the attention of architects interested in
manipulating the texture and the quality of concrete’s finished surface.
Ornamental aggregates have been left exposed to give concrete a more
rustic appearance, and a variety of surface treatments have been developed
to alter the appearance of the finished concrete. The 1960s and 1970s in
particular was a period in which concrete surfaces were used as a finish on
a massive and widespread basis. Paul Rudolph’s Art and Architecture
Building at Yale University (1964) was a grand experiment in finish
treatment, where the architect and contractor devised a method of using
grooved forms that left corresponding vertical fins that ran the full seven-
story height of the building’s towers. Workmen removed the forms and
then with hammer and chisel knocked away a portion of the fins to create
a rusticated and jagged finish. The resulting grooves channeled rainwater
down the facade in a controlled manner, which in turn limited the effect of
stains on the finished surface, and at a distance the rough texture of the
towers blended into the neo-Gothic architectural context of the
neighborhood.

Stylistic Issues

By 1920 concrete helped inspire architects to visualize massively scaled cities, and for
the next 40 years they sought to refashion the urban landscape in a wholly new and
modern reconfiguration of the 19th-century city. With the turning over of the colonial
order following World War II, much of the world embraced concrete and its promise, but
by the last quarter of the century, the material’s own success wrought a searing critique

against its aesthetic properties and monolithic application. Finally, in the hands of a few
architects across the globe, concrete once again continued as a material with striking
aesthetic possibilities at the close of the century.

The fact that steel-reinforced concrete structures were already fairly common by the
start of the 20th century, at least in parts of Western Europe and North America, is
attested to by the number of notable works designed and constructed between 1900 and
1910. Thomas Edison was already promoting his “monolithic houses” by that time, Frank
Lloyd Wright had designed Unity Temple (Oak Park, 1906), Antoni Gaudi had begun
construction on his Casa Mila apartment block (Barcelona, 1905), and Auguste Perret had
completed the apartment house at 25 bis, rue Franklin (Paris, 1903), followed by a
concrete-frame garage (Paris, 1905). Although concrete had already been employed for
some 30 years as an industrial building material, by the turn of the century it was still too
new to be associated with industrialism. That distinction belonged to iron and steel, the
constituent elements of a landscape troubled by smokestacks and locomotives. Many
architects and engineers also looked to concrete as an alternative to stone, perhaps
because of the many similarities between the two materials. The weight of stone tended
to be a prime factor as a building material, requiring extensive formwork during
construction. Concrete was perceived as the thinking man’s building material, requiring a
scientific mind to fully exploit its properties, which helped rehabilitate its status as a
rough and crude version of stone. Mixtures and ratios, after all, required experimentation
and theorizing by engineers who took out patents on their ideas. The possibility of
creating a monolithic structure excited architects who understood that with concrete each
element (walls, columns, floor, and roof) would resist loads as one integrated structure.
This was an important and tantalizing potential, because for many architects in the early
20th century, the key problem of the day was finding a way to bring pragmatic
considerations of the engineer together with the architect’s taste for beauty and formal
unity.

The French architect Perret is generally looked to as the first 20th-century architect to
fuse the new medium of concrete with existing attempts to find a modern and modernized
expression of architecture. Greatly influenced by the ideas of Viollet-le-Duc, Abbé
Laugier, and especially his mentor Julien Guadet, he sought to extend and embrace
classical ideas about proportions and order to the technology of the 20th century. He saw
concrete as an ideal medium for creating frame structures, articulating columns in a clear
and rational expression of their structural use, rather than clothing and thus obscuring
them in cladding. To emphasize the trabeated character of the structural frame at the
apartment building at 25 bis, rue Franklin, Perret designed the street-facing fenestration
as large as local ordinances allowed. The structure was not clearly articulated; however,
Perret used a subtle technique of varying color and texture to distinguish what was load
bearing from what was not. By varying the color and texture of the facade panels and by
recessing windows and cantilevering the second floor beyond the ground floor ever so
slightly, Perret deemphasized the mass-wall characteristics of the concrete. The effort to
read the facade like a frame-and-panel assemblage, a more truthful reading of the
structure, was Perret’s way of maintaining continuity with the neorational ideas of the
past.

The engineer, builder, and pioneer in concrete construction, Francois Hennebique,
acted as consultant on Perret’s project. Hennebique had several patents for concrete

members already, and unlike the architect who strove for a homogeneous and uniform
structural expression, Hennebique articulated the joints between column and beam by
thickening the columns and extending the beams in a cantilevered bracket (Hennebique
House, Paris, 1904). Engineers such as Robert Maillart and Eugene Freyssinet, however,
were the first to appreciate concrete’s nonrectilinear potential. Maillart designed arcuated
bridges whereas Freyssinet built factories with curvilinear concrete-shell roofs, and
perhaps their lack of concern over spatial enclosure allowed them the freedom to
experiment more easily with form and thus more fully capitalize on the unique prospects
of the material. Late 19th-century experiments with concrete reinforced by wire mesh
produced curvilinear ship hulls that prefigured this later engineering development. Perret
by necessity had to think in terms of both space and structure, and influenced by the
architectural concerns of his day, he was less willing to depart from the rectilinear norm
that marked architectural design at the turn of the century. Although concrete may have
seemed an alternative to the industrial steel aesthetic, ironically architects increasingly
saw in the material an opportunity to use it as a medium for expressing the machine age.

For many repetition of the rectilinear module was the key. Le Corbusier’s influentia.
post-World War I solution to the housing shortage in Flanders was the Domino housing
project. Six concrete columns, three horizontal slabs, foundation blocks, and switchback
stairs comprised the fundamental elements of this kit of parts, and the articulation
between column and slab was without beams, the trabeation fully embedded and
embodied in the clean and ornament-free lines of the steel-reinforced concrete. Le
Corbusier asserted this system was an economical solution that could be mass-produced,
with wall elements added to complete this housing scheme. Although this model had little
practical application during and immediately after the war, it was nonetheless a powerfu.
inspiration among architectural thinkers who sought a fit between modern materials and
modern architectural aesthetics. As an idealized shelter, stripped of non-load-bearing
elements and reduced to the purity of column and horizontal planar members, it was
hailed as a bold gesture toward a new symbolic architectural representation free of
historical iconography.

Thirty years later Le Corbusier was busy designing an entire city (Chandigarh, India)
out of concrete and masonry, but in 1946 he remarked on an important transformation of
thought that had taken place. From a “machine infatuation” to a more “spiritual” pursuit
of the material’s potential, he claimed that architects now sought to tease out less sterile
formal aspects of concrete. The small music pavilion for the Phillips Company at the
1958 World Exposition in Brussels reveals how concrete could be thought of as more
than a respite from historical reference. As a technologically sophisticated building
material ripe with technical problems, it was deemed ideal for creating a space that
celebrated a marriage between multiple and technologically sophisticated art forms. The
project architect, Iannis Xenakis, designed the general layout, leaving Le Corbusier to
concentrate on finding formal expression to match the “electronic poem” composed by
Edgard Varése, the multimedia piece that combined visual projection with electronic
sound. The architects devised a hyperbolic paraboloid shell to enclose the exhibition
space, believing that using concrete here would be economical because this complex
form could be created with straight lines and repetitive rectilinear sections. The shells of
the paraboloid needed to be thin—too thin, in fact, to cast in place—so the architects
sought the expertise of engineers in devising a system of prestressed panels formed on


sand in a nearby warehouse, then bolted together and stiffened by longitudinal precast
ribs.

The Phillips Pavilion, however, was an exception. For the most part, concrete had
supplanted stone as the building material of weight and dignity. Although engineers
occasionally utilized its fluid-form properties to advantage (see especially the most
famous case, the Chapel Notre-Dame-du-Haut by Le Corbusier), architects typically
bowed to the thrift of rectilinearity. Concrete remained a conservative but increasingly
popular building material. Louis Kahn’s Salk Institute (1959-65) is perhaps the best
example illustrating how an architect could use the modernist idiom to create dignified
space. The blank gray laboratory facades alternating with fenestration and the mass of
concrete stair towers created a serene yet monumental outdoor court. Kahn christened
this space “sublime,” a term repeated by critics at a loss to surpass the analysis of the
designer. The spiritual quality of this central but little-used space was the result of the
architect’s effort to bring together in an artistic treatment two disciplines that seemed to
be yawning further apart in the 20th century. Again, architecture was to marry the
rationalism of science to the romanticism of art, a marriage many architectural thinkers
believed was more important than ever after World War II and the advent of what many
thought was the ultimate work of science, the atomic bomb. It was, in fact, the technical
demands of materials like concrete that led architects like Pier Luigi Nervi, a pioneer in
the use of concrete himself, to insist that “architecture is and must be a synthesis of
technology and art,” rather than “separate aspects” of a building process. The architect’s
role was changing—no longer an agent of technological change, but a mediator of
technology. Nervi gave a series of lectures at Harvard University in the early 1960s
urging students and practitioners to embrace a disciplinary unity, a sentiment that belied
anxieties over the architect’s weakening influence. The technical demands of concrete
forced engineers to specialize in its design and maintenance, a task few architects were
capable of handling competently.

Although a naive booster of a synthesized design process, Nervi was at least prescient
about one aspect of concrete’s future. In those same lectures he predicted that concrete
would be utilized as the principal building material in ever-larger public and commercial
projects. Across the globe governments and government agencies, as well as wealthy
groups of profit-interested private companies, had already been forcing dramatic
interventions in the landscape. Urban renewal and new towns, often composed of large-
scale multiblock buildings, housing blocks, hotels, convention centers, and government
administration centers, came to dominate wherever they were built. Modernist vocabulary
did not change by this embrace of the large and the hard as much as it grew in scale. The
Brutalism movement grew out of this application of concrete and masonry, and the
multilane freeway elevated on giant-sized piers designed entirely by civil and structural
engineers came to mark the American urban landscape in particular. Even before Nervi
finished his lectures, a skepticism of this progressive gigantism gained momentum,
particularly with such books as Jane Jacobs’s (1964). She fronted a chorus
questioning the inhumane character that resulted in part from gross-scaled concrete
construction. Although but one of many building materials put to use in this boom,
concrete had finally supplanted steel as the epitome of modernity’s failings. Archi tects
who achieved fame via an expertise in the design of the monolithic concrete environment
watched as their careers withered into obscurity (see especially Paul Rudolph).


The rise of critical regionalism as a critique of modernism, and especially the
development of Postmodern architecture, has meant a shift away from the monolithic at
many scales. The large-scale concrete block has given way in architectural importance to
smaller works that have been built in a whole range of locales across the world. Even
large-scale building complexes have been commissioned in smaller pieces to a handful of
architects. By the end of the 20th century, however, concrete continued to offer a small
number of architects the possibilities of abstract design in a medium affording a range of
formal possibilities limited not so much by physics as by budgets.

Although concrete remained a vital structural material, as an aesthetic
medium it was perceived as a stylistically austere means of creating
minimalist space but only at great expense. Architects such as Enrique
Norton of Mexico City and Tadao Ando of Osaka relied on many
techniques from the modernist boom, using concrete as a decorative as
well as spatial and structural medium. They went to the trouble of
designing the formwork themselves to create a grid of indentations
punctuated by bolt holes left over from the forms during curing. In House
Le by Norton (Mexico City, 1995), the three-story concrete facade was
articulated with this pattern in a way that softened the otherwise massive
plane while maintaining an expression of urban privacy that embodies the
heart of this compact courtyard house. Ando’s austere but elegant Church
of the Light (Osaka, 1989) used a similar texture derived from impressions
left by the formwork. In this case the partitioning of the concrete walls by
the grid of form lines gave the finished surface a taut effect, one that
makes the mass wall seem more like a tensile surface. The small size of
the church, coupled with the application of simple but stark openings
articulating one space from the next, meant that as the principal finish
material, the concrete was not overwhelming or oppressive.

Political and Economic Influences

Concrete persistently teased architects with the allure of its fluid form and sculptural
potential. Steel-reiforced concrete has indeed been designed and constructed as
curvilinear elements, but such practice proved expensive because forms typically had to
be customized and could not be used repetitively. Using concrete as a finish material
meant ensuring a smooth and visually clean and stainless appearance. This required
increased care, skill, and on-site inspection, which translated into higher budgets. It is
perhaps ironic that at the end of the century, when curvilinear forms had become an
obsession for many architects in a wide variety of materials, concrete had become
associated with a rectilinearity that Perret would have appreciated 100 years earlier. The

Stone Cloud House by Kyu Sung Woo (Seoul, 1996) reveals the pragmatic uses concrete
was often put to at the end of the century. The villa encloses a courtyard that spatially
unites the extended family, each unit of the family dwelling in spaces enclosed by cast-
in-place concrete bearing walls, but finished with stone from a local quarry. The stone is
arranged in a pattern of square-panel courses that echo the stone flooring as well as the
rectilinearity of the various spatial units that enclose the court-yard. The pattern is also
vaguely reflective of the concrete it hides and adorns.

The success of concrete as a building material early in the century stemmed in large
part from the argument by builders, engineers, and architects that concrete was cheaper
than timber and stone. This was true only because the majority of labor required in
creating concrete structures demanded less skill and training than stonemasonry.
Concrete construction demanded a shift in thinking, a shift that had profound
consequences in the construction industry at large. At the turn of the century those few
architects, engineers, and contractors who insisted on the application of steel-reinforced
concrete strove to bring science into a practice dominated by a craft tradition. In their
view the demands of concrete construction meant that technical innovation would prevail
over what was perceived as the monopoly of an artisan class.

Unlike stone construction, a monumental material that concrete ultimately came to
supplant in many respects, concrete requires a small group of highly skilled technicians to
ensure a proper and safe construction process. This stratification of labor between the
skilled engineers and foremen, and the unskilled and in some cases untrained laborers,
proved to be an important and distinctive aspect of the modernization of the building
industry as a whole and became typical of virtually every modernizing industry.
Demanding empirical testing both in the laboratory and in the field, as well as inspections
that only well-educated and trained engineers were capable of, this new organization
effectively diminished the power of older family and regionalbased trade networks. These
older craft unions, as historian Amy Slaton has argued, the bricklayers and the
stonecutters in particular, “had little influence in the concrete industry, and technological
advance helped render their diminished role both possible and permanent” (2000).

The success of this managerial transformation has been amply demonstrated by the
widespread synthesis of the concrete construction industry across the globe, particularly
in the post-World War II period, and its effect on other construction trades. Steel-
reinforced concrete structures, many resembling in skeletal form Le Corbusier’s Dom-ino
house, have appeared in regions where unskilled labor is plentiful. The limiting factor in
such construction tended to be set by the cost of reinforcing steel rather than the technical
expertise of the engineering profession in the newly liberated nations, many of which
realized an acute need for large-scale buildings to house new political, financial, and
domestic populations. Many governments, particularly in the Soviet Union, as well as
myriad newly independent nations after the war, built large-scale projects in concrete to
house the populace. Urban renewal in the United States and postwar reconstruction
largely funded by the Marshall Plan vaulted concrete into a position as the preeminent
building material during the 1950s and 1960s and even later. In some regard the
modernist effort to make architecture relevant to social and economic problems, an effort
epitomized by massively scaled visions of new cities such as Le Corbusier’s plans to
remake Paris, came as near realization during this period as it ever would. Although
concrete was by no means the only material put to use in these grand visions, by the

1970s it was a material that not only seemed to epitomize modernity and modernization
both materially and politically, it had become inextricably associated with the problems
of excess and scale in both socialist and capitalist planning.
JERRY WHITE

Ando, Tadao (Japan); Brutalism; Le Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-
Edouard) (France); Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp, France;
Dom-ino Houses (1914-15); Gaudi, Antoni (Spain); Maillart, Robert
(Switzerland); Nervi, Pier Luigi (Italy); Norten, Enrique (Mexico); Perret,
Auguste (France); Precast Concrete; Reinforced Concrete; Salk Institute,
La Jolla, California

Further Reading

For technical information the best sources in the United States can be had from the
American Concrete Institute and the many publications and manuals published by that
organization. General works of architectural history are useful for the story of concrete
over the 20th century and its early period in the 19th century. Peters’s is an especially
good investigation of how technology influenced the practice of building, whereas
Frampton’s provides an interesting study of materials and architectural thought. For
the economic transformation as played out in the concrete industry, Slaton’s is
excellent.
Billington, David P., Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997
Monk, Tony, Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-Academy, 1999
Nervi, Pier Luigi, translated by Robert Einaudi, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press, 1965
Parker, Harry, New York: Wiley, and London: Chapman and Hall, 1943; 7th edition,
by Parker and James E.Ambrose, New York and Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley, 1997
Peters, Tom F., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996
Slaton, Amy E., Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001
Slessor, Catharine, | London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 2000
Stoller, Ezra, and Daniel S.Friedman, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999
Treib, Marc, — Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1996

CONCRETE-SHELL STRUCTURE

Concrete-shell structures consist of a thin membrane of concrete in compression. The
earliest practical applications of concrete shells in architecture took place in Germany
during the early 1920s. The basic mathematical formulas for shell designs were
developed by Franz Dischinger and Ulrich Finsterwalder, employees of the Dyckerhoff-
Widmann engineering firm. Dischinger, along with Walther Bauersfeld of the Carl Zeiss

Optical Company, designed the first major concrete-shell roof for the Jena Planetarium in
1924. To create the 82-foot hemispherical dome, a thin layer of concrete was sprayed
over a skeletal frame of reinforcement bars. This technique became known as the Zeiss-
Dywidag, or “Z-D,” process. By the 1930s employees at Dyckerhoff-Widmann, along
with engineers in Spain, France, and Italy, began designing other forms of concrete-shell
roofs,

Kresge Auditorium Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, shown from
the rear, roof being replaced, designed
by Eero Saarinen (1955)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

including barrel vaults, octagonal domes, and hyperbolic paraboloids.

The introduction and early promotion of concrete shells in the United States stemmed
primarily from the efforts of one man: Anton Tedesko. By 1932 Tedesko, an employee of
Dyckerhoff-Widmann, had moved to the United States and persuaded the Chicago
engineering firm of Roberts and Schaefer to acquire the American rights to the Zeiss-
Dywidag process. The first building in the United States to take advantage of this
technique was the Brook Hill Farm Dairy Pavilion, built in 1934 for the Century of
Progress International Exposition in Chicago. The multi-barrel-vaulted building was
designed by Richard Phillipp. Roberts and Schaefer served as design consultants. Within
months the engineering firm was also involved in the design of a concrete-shell dome for
the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City.

Articles on these buildings, appearing in both engineering and architectural journals,
promoted concrete shells as an ideal solution for roofing large, unobstructed spaces, as
they eliminated the need of rafters, purlins, or heavy trusses and were considered
fireproof. The development of reusable formwork in the construction of concrete barrel
vaults made shell roofs economically competitive with steel-truss designs.

Roberts and Schaefer dominated the American concrete-shell market prior to World
War II. By 1941 the firm had built concrete shells covering almost ten million square feet
of area. Most of their commissions during these years consisted of barrel-vaulted airplane
hangars and sports halls. Included was the Hershey Sports Arena in Hershey,
Pennsylvania, which, when completed in 1936, was roofed by the largest concrete shell in
the world. During World War II concrete shells provided an ideal alternative to steel
trusses for roofing large structures, including the many warehouses, factories, and
hangars built to meet war-related needs. Benefits of concrete shells recognized by the
military included speed of construction, ability to withstand intense heat, and, if the
structure became damaged, ability to change distribution of stress.

After the war other American architects and engineers became involved in the creation
of concrete shells. Most notable was the New York engineering firm of Ammann and
Whitney. The company developed its own barrel-vaulted shell design, which it then used
in the construction of a series of wide-span airplane hangars, including a double hangar
for American Airlines (1948) at Midway Airport in Chicago. In the mid-1950s the firm
worked with Eero Saarinen on several of the architect’s innovative shell designs,
including the curved, equilateral triangularshaped roof of Kresge Auditorium at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the fluid, bird-shaped Trans World Airline
Terminal in New York.

The organic shape of Saarinen’s TWA Terminal reflected a desire among architects
around the world in the 1950s to take advantage of the ability of shell structures to be
molded into a wide range of artistic forms. The Spanish engineer Felix Candela explored
a variety of hyerbolic paraboloidal forms in his designs for thin-shell buildings in
Mexico, such as the dramatically cantilevered entrance canopy of the Ciba Plant (1955)
in Churubusco. In Italy, Pier Luigi Nervi explored the use of concrete ribs in aesthetically
pleasing designs to strengthen large concrete roofs, including the shallow dome of the
Palazzetto dello Sport (1957) in Rome. Le Corbusier’s hyperbolic paraboloidal shell
design for the Phillips Pavilion (1958) at the Brussels International Exposition was just
one of several exhibition halls at the event to include a concrete-shell roof. Roberts and
Schaefer also experimented with new shell forms in the late 1950s, as illustrated in their
involvement with IL.M.Pei on the roof design for his May D and F Department Store
(1958) in Denver, Colorado, which consists of four large back-to-back gables.

At the First Congress of the International Association for Shell Structures, held in
Madrid in 1959, the Swiss engineer Heinz Isler presented a paper in which he illustrated
new techniques for creating nongeometric shell forms. This led to further explorations
into the expressive potential of concrete shells. Isler’s own design for the Sicli Company
Building (1969) in Geneva includes a flowing roof form supported at seven points. A
massive concrete shell in the shape of a Paleozoic trilobite roofed the Velodrome at the
1976 Olympics in Montreal. Although a major advantage of thin-shell concrete is its
usual low economic cost, the use of shells was a principal factor in the exorbitant cost of
the Sydney Opera House (1957-73) by Jorn Utzon. The complexity of the billowing, sail-


like forms that compose its roof resulted in an engineering nightmare. It took
approximately 380,000 man-hours and 2,000 computer hours to complete the design.
During the last two decades of the 20th century, creative development in the design of
thin shells significantly waned. The few concrete shells that were constructed consist
primarily of simple cylinders and hemispheres on industrial buildings, such as bulk-
storage facilities. Milo Ketchum, a major designer of thin shells, suggested several
factors for the decline in an unpublished essay titled “What Happened to Shells?” His
reasons included the fact that the cost of concrete shells is usually more difficult to
calculate than the cost of precast, prestressed concrete slabs or steel roof systems, two
building forms that received extensive publicity in these years. Thin shells, in contrast, no
longer had a charismatic promoter, such as Tedesko or Candela, touting the benefits of
their use. As a result most engineers and architects were not fully aware of the aesthetic
and structural possibilities of concrete shells. Ketchum predicted, however, that sometime
in the future the relative cost of structural steel would rise to a point where once again
designers would be drawn to the aesthetic, structural, and economic benefits of concrete
shells.
LISA D.SCHRENK

Precast Concrete

Further Reading

Billington, David P., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965; 2nd edition, New York and
London: McGraw-Hill, 1982
Condit, Carl W., 2 vols., New York: Oxford University Press, 1960

Condit, Carl W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968; 2nd edition,
1982
Cowan, Henry J., New York: Wiley, 1978; London: Wiley, 1979
Elliott, Cecil D., Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London: MIT Press, 1992

Joedicke, Jiirgen, Stuttgart, Germany: Kramer, 1962; as | New York: Reinhold, and
London: Tiranti, 1963
Mainstone, Rowland J., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, and London: Allen
Lane, 1975; 2nd edition, Oxford and Boston: Architectural Press, 1998
Melaragno, Michele G., New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991
Milo Ketchum archive <www.ketchum.org/milo/> (includes a great deal of information
on concrete shells)

CONGRES INTERNATIONAUX
D’ ARCHITECTURE MODERNE (CIAM
1928-)

The Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne, founded in Switzerland in 1928,
was related to earlier European avantgarde efforts, such as the German Werkbund’s 1927
Weissenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart, and to journals such as the Swiss Some of its initial
impetus also came from Le Corbusier’s attempts to overturn the 1927 rejection of his
entry in the League of Nations competition in favor of a Beaux-Arts design. The first
CIAM meeting, sponsored by the French-Swiss noblewoman Héléne de Mandrot,
resulted in the issuing of the La Sarraz Declaration, signed by 24 European architects,
which demanded that architecture should be taken away from the classically oriented
Beaux-Arts schools of architecture and linked to the general economic system. It invoked
Taylorist ideas about the need to design for minimum working effort through the
rationalization and standardization of building components and emphasized that
architects should seek to influence public opinion in favor of the new architectura
approaches. By its second congress, held in Frankfurt in 1929, CIAM began to be the
most important international organization of the Modern movement in architecture, with
delegates on its governing council, the CIRPAC (Comité International pour la Realisation
des Problémes d’Architecture Contemporaine) from Belgium (Victor Bourgeois),
Denmark (Ed Heiberg), Germany (Ernst May), England (C.J.Robertson, later replaced by
Wells Coates), Finland (Alvar Aalto), France (Le Corbusier), Hungary (Farkas Molnar),
Italy (Alberto Sartoris), the Netherlands (Mart Stam), Norway (Lars Backer), Poland
(Szymon Syrkus), Sweden (Sven Markelius), Switzerland (Hans Schmidt), Spain
(Fernando Garcia Mercadal, later replaced by Josep Lluis Sert), the United States
(Richard Neutra), and the Soviet Union (Moisei Ginzburg), along with its Swiss
president, Karl Moser, and secretarygeneral, Sigfried Giedion, a Zurich art historian and
critic. Its membership shifted many times over the rest of its history, although Le
Corbusier and especially Giedion remained central throughout, until the decision in 1959
by a group of former CIAM “youth members” led by Alison and Peter Smithson and
Aldo van Eyck to cease using the name.

The published results of the second and third congresses included plans from the
associated exhibitions that traveled across Europe, the first on housing for the lowest-
income wage earners and the second on the rational site organization of housing districts.
The approach taken reflected the ideas of the architectural avant-garde at the time: the
importance of efficiently designed, sanitary, and well-lit minimum apartment housing and
the related need to site the buildings for repetitive low-cost construction and maximum
solar exposure for every unit. By 1931 a self-selected core group within the congress,
which included Le Corbusier, Giedion, and the new president, the Dutch town planner
Cornelis van Eesteren, determined that the next congress, to be held in Moscow in 1932,
should be devoted to the theme of the “Functional City.” In contrast to what he called the
“cardboard architecture” of classical urbanism, van Eesteren and other CIAM members
advocated an approach to city planning based on the most rational siting of “functional
elements,” such as workplaces and transportation centers. This idea was linked to the
belief that city planning should be based on the creation of separate zones for each of the
CIAM “four functions” of dwelling, work, recreation, and transportation, an idea already
stated in part in the La Sarraz Declaration. Changes in Soviet architectural policies led to
repeated postponements of the fourth congress, and it was eventually held on a cruise
ship traveling from Marseilles to Athens and back in July-August 1933. CLAM members
from Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France,


Hungary, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain, Switzerland,
and Yugoslavia analyzed the same-scale plans of 33 modern cities prepared by CIAM
groups from most of these countries, along with additional plans from Dalat, Vietnam;
Bandung, Netherlands Indies (now Indonesia); and Baltimore, Detroit, and Los Angeles.
The disputed results of this congress were eventually published in Greece in late 1933
and formed the basis of what Le Corbusier would later style :

After 1933 CIAM was greatly affected both by the Soviet shift toward what came to
be known as socialist realism, which often resulted in an overscaled neoclassicism, and
by the Nazi proscription of the Modern movement in Germany. CIAM activities were
ended in the Soviet Union, and German CIAM members such as Walter Gropius and
Mies van der Rohe eventually relocated to Harvard University (1937) and the Illinois
Institute of Technology (1938) in the United States, respectively. After several years of
delegate meetings, the fifth CIAM congress was held in Paris in 1937 on the theme of
“Housing and Recreation.” Associated with this congress was Le Corbusier’s “Pavilion
des Temps Nouveaux” at the 1937 Paris Exposition, which included large murals
illustrating the CIAM four functions and a display of the CIAM 4 “doctrine of urbanism,”
which he termed _—_ Following this, Giedion, who gave the Charles Eliot Norton lectures
at Harvard in 1938-39, advocated that the next CIAM congress be held in the United
States, but no CIAM congresses occurred again until 1947. In the interim Giedion and
Sert set up a New York CIAM chapter in 1944, and Le Corbusier went from attempting
to influence the occupation Vichy government to successfully allying himself with the
Allied victors. CIAM and finally published in Paris in 1943, became immensely
influential in the postwar years, particularly in Latin America and eventually in the
decolonizing nations of the former European empires. This was due both to Le
Corbusier’s own efforts, such as his working with Brazilian architects in Rio de Janeiro
in 1936 and with Argentine architects on several occasions, and to the efforts of Sert,
who developed urban master plans with Paul Lester Wiener in Brazil, Peru, Colombia,
Venezuela, and Cuba. Sert became president of CIAM in 1947, but the first two postwar
congresses, CIAM 6, held in Bridgwater, England (1947), and CIAM 7, held in Bergamo,
Italy (1949), were unable to develop any clear new approaches. CIAM 8, “The Heart of
the City,” held near London in 1951, was more successful in this regard and was one of
the earliest efforts to discuss the issue of urban public space in the transformed postwar
circumstances of modern architecture. Its combining of the Italian and Polish CLAM
groups’ concerns about historic centers with Le Corbusier, Sert, and Wiener’s fascination
with the design of new monumental cores suggested a different basis for modern
architecture beyond the design of social housing, one that looked both backward to the
classical tradition and forward to a later generation’s interest in reconstituting urbanity in
late 20th-century cities.

In 1952 the CIAM Council decided to begin efforts to hand over CIAM to the “youth
members,” and the first step in this direction was to increase their participation at CLIAM
9, which was held in Aix-en-Provence, France, in 1953. In the confused developments
that followed, a youth group charged with organizing the tenth congress and eventually
known as Team X (Ten) emerged, with Alison and Peter Smithson of England, Aldo van
Eyck and Jacob Bakema of the Netherlands, and Georges Candilis as important voices.
CIAM 10, held in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia (now Croatia), in 1956 was the last regular
CIAM congress, and there the decision was made to dissolve all existing CLAM groups.


A selected group of 30 members, including members of Team X, were to plan the next
congress. This was eventually held at Otterlo, the Netherlands, in 1959 and was published
as. At this congress it was decided to discontinue the use of the name CIAM.

CIAM’s influence on architecture and architectural education has been extensive,
ranging from the plans of the new capitals of Chandigarh, India (Le Corbusier, Jeanneret,
Fry, and Drew, 1950), and Brasilia, Brazil (Costa and Niemeyer, 1955), to efforts such as
the Harvard Urban Design program, established by Sert in 1960. Although the name
CIAM was no longer used, in many ways Team X, which lasted until 1981, was a
continuation of some aspects of CIAM, including the latter’s emphasis on the importance
f a small avant-garde of like-minded architects meeting to develop urbanistic doctrines
nd the use of architectural magazines and visiting design teaching positions to
isseminate ideas. Much of the criticism of CIAM since its demise has concerned its
pecific formal strategies of urban reorganization, which were deliberately intended to
reak with all previous pat-terns of urban development to help bring into being a more
ational and collectivist society. By the 1950s CIAM members were themselves
uestioning specific aspects of these “functional city” strategies, although they did not
hallenge the basic premises of CIAM activities. Since 1960 CIAM has been extensively
riticized and is usually understood as an extension of the work of Le Corbusier; in part
his is true, but it oversimplifies the organization’s complex history.

somapro

eoeooes

ERIC MUMFORD
Athens Charter; Brasilia, Brazil; Chandigarh, India; Corbusier, Le
(Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Sert, Josep Lluis (United States);
Smithson, Peter and Alison (England); van Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands);
Weissenhofsiedlung, Deutscher Werkbund (Stuttgart, 1927)

Further Reading

CIAM, “Constatations du [Ve Congrés,” — 44-46 (November 1933); as
“Statements of the Athens Congress, 1933,” in by Auke van der Woud,
Delft, Netherlands: Delft University Press, 1983
CIAM, “La Sarraz Declaration,” in edited by Ulrich Conrads, Berlin: Ulstem, and
Giitersloh, Germany: Bertelsmann, 1964; as translated by Michael Bullock,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1970
CIAM-France, Paris: Plon, 1943; as — by Le Corbusier, translated by Anthony
Eardley, New York: Grossman, 1973
Giedion, Sigfried, New York: Wittenborn, 1951
International Congress for Modern Architecture 1930, Brussels, Belgium, Frankfurt:
Englert und Schlosser, 1931
International Conference for Modern Architecture 1937, Paris, France, Boulogne-sur-
Seine: Editions de 1’Architecture d’Aujourd’hui, 1937
International Congress for Modern Architecture, edited by J.Tyrwhitt, José Luis Sert,
and E.N. Rogers, New York: Pellegrini and Cudahy, and London: Lund Humphries, 1952
International Congress for New Building, Zurich, Switzerland, Frankfurt: Englert
und Schlosser, 1930
Mumford, Eric, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2000

Newman, Oscar, New York: Universe Books, London: Tiranti, and Stuttgart,
Germany: Kramer, 1961
Sert, José Luis, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, and
London: Milford and Oxford University Press, 1942

CONNELL, WARD AND LUCAS

Architecture firm, England

The London-based architectural firm Connell, Ward, and Lucas was founded in 1933
by two architects from New Zealand—Amyas Connell (1901-80) and Basil Ward (1902—
76)—and one from England—Colin Lucas (1906-84). Connell and Ward arrived in
England in the 1920s and studied at the Bartlett School of Architecture, University of
London; in 1926 both won prizes to study architecture in Rome. Lucas studied at the
University of Cambridge and in 1928 formed a building company whose main goal was
to experiment with concrete construction. Although the partnership lasted only six years
and was disbanded in 1939, it was nonetheless one of the leading modernist firms active
in Britain during the 1930s, and the architects were important, vocal proponents of
modern architecture.

Before forming the partnership, the three were already known in architectural circles
for innovative projects. Connell designed High and Over (1928-31), a home for the art
historian and archaeologist Bernard Ashmole, who later became the director of the
British Museum in London. Located on a 12-acre site in Buckinghamshire, High and
Over is often considered the first significant modern house built in England. Local
residents protested that its white-walled exterior, ribbon windows, and Y plan were
incongruous in the rural setting. In 1930 Lucas designed the first reinforced-concrete
house in England, Bourne End in Buckinghamshire. Bourne End’s extensive glazing,
unornamented surfaces, and flat roof show a strong identification with the modernist
language of the International Style. With Connell in 1932, Ward designed New Farm in
Surrey, a home with an open, spacious plan whose structural system was modeled on Le
Corbusier’s Dom-ino Houses.

In 1933 Connell, Ward, and Lucas not only officially established their partnership but
each became a founding member of the MARS (Modern Architectural Research) Group,
the British branch of CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne). The
firm’s involvement with MARS is indicative of the architects’ support for the Modern
movement in general, as well as their interest in architectural developments on an
international scale, innovations in technology and construction, and solutions for mass
housing. Despite opposition from the British building industry, the architects consistently
developed new building techniques to make the walls of their reinforcedconcrete
structures progressively thinner, and they rightly looked at their own work as
experimental.

The firm’s commitment to the new architecture, as International Style and modernist
works were often described, was immortalized in a 1934 BBC radio debate titled “For
and Against Modern Architecture,” when Connell agreed to be challenged on the air by


architect Reginald Blomfield. Connell, who had been unknown to the public before the
debate, responded boldly to Blomfield’s fierce attacks on the International Style for its
foreignness, its overemphasis on function, its lack of an artistic vocabulary, and its break
with venerated traditions. Blomfield criticized the use of the flat roof in a thinly veiled
attack on French and German modernism derived from Le Corbusier and Walter
Gropius’s Bauhaus aesthetics, respectively. A transcript of the debate was made public,
Connell emerged as a public figure, and the firm began to receive more commissions.

One of the partnership’s most well known works is a house at 66 Frognal Way (1938)
in Hampstead, London. Built for a lawyer and his family in a neighborhood of neo-
Georgian villas—one of which was owned by Blomfield—the house celebrated the
elements Blomfield despised: unornamented, white exterior walls; ribbon windows; a
free plan; and a free facade. Once again basing the structural system on Dom-ino Houses,
Connell, Ward, and Lucas used their ample experience with reinforced concrete to
puncture the house with gardens, concrete patio slabs on all three levels, a sun deck, and
an observation point. A colorful, lush interior, most of whose furnishings the architects
designed, is masked by the unadorned street facade. The design of the house, first made
public in 1936, resulted in a series of lawsuits precipitated by Blomfield, accusing the
architects of destroying the character of the neighborhood. The comparatively
unquestioned presence of E.Maxwell Fry’s modernist Sun House (1936) around the
corner is most likely testament to Blomfield’s personal hatred of Connell.

Although Connell, Ward, and Lucas is most famous for designing private homes, in
1935 it participated with other MARS members in a competition for public housing. The
firm’s entry—reinforced-concrete flats (apartments)—did not win, but in that same year
the firm built other blocks of low-cost flats; the first, Kent House, is in the Chalk Farm
neighborhood in London, and the second, in Surrey, was designed as an extension of a
Regency-style house. The blunt modernist style of this addition was criticized for
clashing with the existing, more traditional building.

Despite the firm’s defense of modernism and its controversial works, a 1936 design
for the Newport Civic Building, with its overt references to Ragnar Ostberg’s Stockholm
Town Hall (1909-23), seemed to Connell, Ward, and Lucas’s peers to have betrayed the
modernist cause. Several MARS Group members objected to the design’s particular use
of brick, its classical symmetry, and its symbolism of function, and the firm was forced to
explain and defend the work in front of a MARS meeting. An attempt to officially
censure Connell, Ward, and Lucas was abandoned, but from that point on, the three had
little interaction with the group, despite remaining members for several more years.

With few commissions at the beginning of World War II, Connell, Ward, and Lucas
closed in 1939 and did not reopen after the war. Each of the three architects continued to
practice on his own. Connell went to Nairobi, Kenya, and established a new firm,
TRIAD. His works include the Aga Khan Platinum Jubilee Hospital (1959) and the
Parliament Buildings (1963); he returned to England in 1977. Ward set up a new firm as
well, became the Lethaby Professor of Architecture at the Royal College of Art in
London, and then led the School of Architecture at the Manchester College of Art.
Ward’s firm designed the microbiology building (1960) at Oxford University as well as a
store and office block (1967) at the Glasgow Airport. Lucas joined the Housing Division
of the London County Council (LCC); under his supervision the LCC designed the


important Alton West Estate (1955-59) at Roehampton, a housing scheme inspired by Le
Corbusier’s Unite d’Habitation in Marseilles (1946-52).

The work of Connell, Ward, and Lucas is marked by a consistent willingness to
experiment with modern materials and forms. Its use of concrete, steel, and glass and its
identification with the pared-down elements of modernist works was unusual for the
rather conservative architectural climate of England in the 1930s, but it shows the
architects to have been imbued with the same spirit as that of first-generation modern
architects in continental Europe.

DEBORAH LEWITTES
Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM, 1928-);
Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Dom-ino Houses
(1914-15); International Style; London, England; Unite d’Habitation
Marseilles

Selected Works

High and Over, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, 1928-31
Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, 1930
New Farm, Surrey, 1932
Kent House, Chalk Farm, London, 1935
Project for reinforced working-class flats 1935
Film Studios for Sound Cit Ltd., Shepperton, Middlesex, 1936
House for Philip Proudman, 26 Bessborough Road, Roehampton, London, 1938

66 Frognal Way, Hampstead, London, 1938

Further Reading

The special issue of contains essays by Henry-Russell Hitchcock and others. The two
subsequent issues of the journal (December 1956 and January 1957) contain short letters
by Peter Smithson and Colin Rowe, commenting on the importance of Connell, Ward,
and Lucas. The book by William Curtis contains a section on Connell, Ward, and Lucas.
“Connell, Ward and Lucas,” 72 (November 1956)
Curtis William, Milton Keynes, England: The Open University Press,
1975
New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1937.
Sharp, Dennis, “British Modern Architecture of the 30s. The Work of Connell, Ward and
Lucas,” 240 (September 1990)
Sharp, Dennis (editor), London: Book Art, 1994
Thistlewood, David, and Edward Heeley, “Connell, Ward and Lucas: Towards a
Complex Critique,” 2/1 (1997)

CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT

Construction management refers to those management services performed by an
architect, engineer, or contractor under separate or special agreement with the owner of a
construction project. Traditionally, these services are not a part of the architect’s or
engineer’s basic services, but additional services.

Often these services are included in a comprehensive service or construction
management contract. The construction management contract formalizes the arrangement
wherein responsibilities for coordination and accomplishment of project planning, design,
and construction are given to a single construction firm.

Construction management services include nine primary activities: developing and
operating the overall management system, estimating the project cost, project planning,
project scheduling, reduction of project time duration, resource management, project time
control, the project cost system, and contract administration.

Developing and operating the overall management system provides for the general
management of the project from its conception through any warranty period. It is the
oversight mechanism that ties all phases of a project together.

Estimating the project cost affords the owner and potential construction contractor a
measure of the complexity of a project as well as a way of seeing whether finances are
adequate. Project cost estimating is an iterative process that starts often at the time of
project conception and continues until the project completes its warranty period.

Project planning is a general planning process that details the steps by which a project
can be accomplished. Project planning often continues throughout the entire project
implementation period.

Project scheduling is tied to project planning and attempts to attach work or time
periods to each of the project implementation steps. Often the project scheduling process
is undertaken within the framework of a formal scheduling process, often incorporating
the critical path method (CPM).

Reduction of project time duration is the iterative process whereby the project
schedule is adjusted to reflect time constraints imposed either by the project owner or the
contractor and subcontractors.

Resource management looks at the availability of labor, equipment, and material
resources during the course of the project. Often resource management is a subfunction of
the project scheduling function and is accomplished during the scheduling function.

Project time control is a general management function that provides an accounting of
labor and equipment expenditures in terms of time and money on various project
activities. Often performed on-site by the clerk of the works, project time control is often
incorporated along with the resource management and project scheduling activities to
provide the owner and contractor with an overall project status report.

Project cost system is the activity that provides the project owner and contractor with
detailed information regarding the status of project expenditures. In addition to the
management of payments, the project cost system provides management of change orders
and other construction contract modifications.


Contract administration is a general function that provides for a review of construction
contract provisions to ensure that both the owner and contractor comply with the
provisions of the contract between them.

According to the Construction Management Association of America, modern
construction management takes several forms, the most common being Traditional
Design Build, Construction Management at Risk, Multiple-Prime Contracting, and
Agency Construction Management Services.

Traditional Design Build remains the most common form. Here the owner engages an
architect or engineer who prepares the design of the complete facility, including
construction drawings, specifications, and contract packages. Once completed, the design
package is offered to interested general contractors who prepare bids for the work and
execute contracts with subcontractors to construct various specialty items. Usually, but
not always, the contractor submitting the lowest bid that meets all of the project
specifications is selected to perform the construction. This contractor is then responsible
for constructing the facility in accordance with the design. The architect-engineer may
also assist the owner in administering the construction contract, including determination
of project progress, for interim payments made to the contractor. Some disadvantages of
the Design Build Process are that the process is time-consuming, as all design work must
be completed before solicitation of the construction contract; the owner generally faces
exposure to contractor claims over design and construction issues because the owner
accepts liability for design in its contract with the contractor; the contractor pursues a
least-cost approach to completing the project, requiring increased oversight and quality
review by the owner; and the absence of a contractor’s input into the project design may
limit the effectiveness and constructibility of the design. Important design decisions
affecting both the types of materials specified and the means of construction may be
made without full consideration of a construction perspective.

Construction Management at Risk is a system adopted and promoted by many large
general contracting firms. It is similar to the Traditional Design Build approach in that
the construction manager acts as a general contractor during construction. Yet, although
the construction manager holds the risk of subletting the construction work to trade
subcontractors and guaranteeing completion of the project for a fixed, negotiated price
following completion of the design, in this approach the construction manager also
provides advisory professional management assistance to the owner before construction,
offering schedule, budget, and constructibility advice during the project-planning phase.
Thus, rather than dealing with a traditional general contractor, the owner deals with a
hybrid construction manager/general contractor. Besides providing the owner with the
benefit of preconstruction services, which may result in advantageous changes to the
project, the Construction Management at Risk form offers the opportunity to begin
construction before completion of the design. The primary disadvantages cited in the
Construction Management at Risk form involve the contractual relationship among the
architect, engineer, general contractor, and owner once construction begins. Once
construction is under way, the construction manager converts from a professional
advisory to the contractual role of the general contractor. Often, tensions over
construction quality, the completeness of the design, and effects on the schedule and
budget can arise because of this change. Interests and stakeholding can also become
similar to the Traditional Design Build system, and adversarial relationships may result.


Multiple-Prime Contracting is a system in which the owner holds separate
contracts with contractors of various disciplines, such as general
construction, structural, mechanical, and electrical. In this system the
owner, or its construction manager, manages the overall schedule and
budget during the entire construction phase. Work in each construction
discipline is bid separately, allowing the flexibility of awarding
construction contracts on the first portions of the project as soon as the
respective aspect of design is completed. Furthermore, the system allows
the owner to have more control over the project schedule, as the owner
sets the schedule for bidding individual portions of the work. For example,
if an initial phase of construction is delayed, the owner may reduce
liability for delays by postponing the bidding of follow-on work. The
problems primarily arise from lack of coordination and contractor delay
issues. Although the general construction prime contractor is often given
contractual responsibility to coordinate the work among trades, including
schedule, this contractor lacks the contractual authority to dictate the
schedule of another contractor.

Agency Construction Management Services, or construction management-for-fee,
encompasses a range of services provided by a construction manager on behalf of an
owner. It is a common misconception that Agency Construction Management Services
represents a distinct project delivery system. In fact it consists of a distinct set of services
that are applicable to any project delivery system. These services can be used by the
owner as necessary to extend or supplement the owner’s own expertise and that of its
own staff and to manage the construction process to help address some of the shortfalls of
the project delivery system chosen. A construction manager working as an agent of the
owner primarily provides the benefit of independent, professional services provided on
the owner’s behalf throughout the project. In contrast to some other project participants,
the Agency Construction Management Services manager has no stake in the project—in
either its design or construction—and maintains a fiduciary duty to act on the owner’s
behalf and to provide impartial advice concerning the construction project. The Agency
Construction Management Services form may include predesign and design services such
as selection of a design team, budget and cost estimating, constructibility review (a
review of design plans and specifications will help the owner verify that the design as
presented is clear to the contractor, poses no construction conflicts, and is economically
feasible to build), value engineering, and contract bidding. Construction services include
construction inspection and surveillance, project controls, and change order review.

When considering whether to use Construction Management Services, an owner may
wish to consider the following items to determine the proper delivery method: type of
project, size of project, owner capabilities, time considerations, and likelihood of

changes.
DENNIS RANDOLPH


CONSTRUCTIVISM

For the 15 or so years of its existence, from the first years of Soviet power to the early
1930s, Constructivism endeavored to alter conceptions of architectural space, to create an
environment that would inculcate new social values, and at the same time to use
advanced structural and technological principles. Paradoxically, the poverty and social
chaos of the early revolutionary years propelled architects toward radical ideas of design,
many of which were related to an already thriving modernist movement in the visual arts.
For example, El Lissitzky’s concepts of space and form, along with those of Kazimir
Malevich (1878-1935) and Vladimir Tatlin (1885-1953), played a major part in the
development of an architecture expressed in “stereometric forms,” purified of the
decorative elements of the eclectic past. The experiments of Lissitzky, Vasily Kandinsky,
and Malevich in painting and of Tatlin and Alexander Rodchenko (1891-1956) in
sculpture had created the possibility of a new architectural movement, defined by
Lissitzky as a synthesis with painting and sculpture.

In its initial phase, Constructivism was closely associated with radical design studios.
The preeminent institution was named VKhUTEMAS (the Russian acronym for “Higher
Artistic and Technical Workshops”), following a reorganization of the Free Workshops in
1920. In 1925 it was reorganized yet again, subse quently to be called the Higher Artistic
and Technical Institute (WKhUTEIN). VkhUTEMAS-VKhUTEIN was by no means the
only Moscow institution concerned with the teaching and practice of architecture in the
1920s, but it was unique in the scope of its concerns (which included the visual and the
applied arts) as well as in the variety of programs and viewpoints that existed there before
its closing in 1930.

Theoretical direction for VKhUTEMAS was provided by the Institute of Artistic
Culture (INKhUK, also founded in 1920), which attempted to establish a science
“examining analytically and synthetically the basic elements both for the separate arts
and for art as a whole.” Its first program curriculum, developed by Kandinsky, was found
too abstract by many at INKhUK, and Kandinsky soon left for Germany and the
Bauhaus. However, the concern with abstract, theoretical principles did not abate with
Kandinsky’s departure.

Indeed, the issue of theory versus construction became a major source of factional
dispute in Russian modernism. The crux of the debate between the rationalists, or
formalists, and the Constructivists lay in the relative importance assigned to aesthetic
theory as opposed to a functionalism derived from technology and materials.
Constructivist ideologues maintained that the work of the architect must not be separated
from the utilitarian demands of technology. The Constructivist theoretician Moisei
Ginzburg (1892-1946) accused the rationalists of ignoring this principle.

ASNOVA, the main rationalist group that included Nikolai Ladovsky (1881-1941),
Vladimir Krinsky (1890-1971), Nikolai Dokuchaev (1899-1941), and for a time
Lissitzky, countered by accusing the Constructivists of “technological fetishism.” Yet
both groups shared a concern for the relation between architecture and social planning,
and both insisted on a clearly defined structural mass based on uncluttered geometric
forms and drew inspiration from modernism in painting and sculpture.


The importance of “pure” artistic experiments in spatial constructions to the evolution
of the principles of Constructivism is demonstrated in the work of Alexander Rodchenko,
who in 1921 defined construction as the contemporary demand for organization and the
utilitarian application of materials. Equally influential was the work of Lissitzky and
Malevich, whose abstract architectonic models (Lissitzky’s “Prouns,” and Malevich’s or

) represented the ultimate refinement in “pure” spatial forms. For Malevich,
architectonic forms were a logical extension of his “Suprematism.” Even as art (and
sculpture) continued to exert a profound influence on the development of modern
architectural design, so architecture came to be seen as the dominant, unifying element in
a synthesis of art forms.

The most dramatic expression of artistic form as a function of material
revealed in space was Tatlin’s Utopian project for a monument to the
Third International (1919-20), intended to be 400 meters in height, with a
spiral steel frame containing a rotating series of geometric forms. The
monument was dismissed as technologically infeasible when the large
model constructed by Tatlin was brought to Moscow for exhibition and
discussion. Yet the designs of Tatlin, Lissitzky, and other architects and
students at the VKhUTEIN workshops gave notice of a new movement
that glorified the rigorous logic of undecorated form as an extension of
material and that intended to participate fully in the shaping of Soviet
society.

Commissariat of Agriculture (1929-
33) by Aleksei Shchusev, MOSCOW

© William C.Brumfield

In the early 1920s, the evolution of Constructivist ideas at INKhUK passed through a
number of polemical phases (the term _ was still broadly interpreted and had not yet
acquired the “functionalist” architectural emphasis of the mid-1920s). The pure-art
faction, influenced by Kandinsky, was opposed by the “productionists” (associated with
the Left Front of the Arts), who anticipated an age of engineers supervising the mass
production of useful, nonartistic objects. A reaction to both sides, particularly the former,
led in 1921 to the formation of a group of artists-constructivists: Alexander Vesnin,
architect; Aleksei Gan, art critic and propagandist; Rodchenko, sculptor and
photographer; Vladimir and Georgii Sternberg, poster designers; and Varvara Stepanova
(1894-1958), artist and set designer.

Until 1925 the Constructivists had little more to show in actual construction than their
more theoretically minded colleagues, the rationalists. The exigencies of social and
economic reconstruction drastically limited the resources available, particularly for
structures requiring a relatively intensive use of modern technology. In fact, the most
advanced of Constructivist works in the early 1920s were wooden set designs by
Alexander Vesnin, Varvara Stepanova, and Liubov Popova.

By 1924 Constructivist architects, whatever their tangible achievements, had acquired
vigorous leadership in the persons of Alexander Vesnin and Moisei Ginzburg. In 1924
Ginzburg’s book —_ appeared in print and established the theoretical and historical base
for a new architecture in a new age, devoid above all of the eclecticism and aestheticism
of capitalist architecture at the turn of the century. The following year the Constructivists
founded the Union of Contemporary Architects (OSA), and in 1926 the Union began
publishing the journal —_ edited by Ginzburg and Vesnin.

Perhaps the most accomplished example of the functional aesthetic is Ginzburg’s own
creation, the apartment house for the People’s Commissariat of Finance (1928-30) at
Narkomfin, designed in collaboration with Ivan Milinis. The smaller scale of the
Narkomfin building (intended for 200 residents) contributed only marginally to a solution
for resolving the urban housing crisis, but it illustrates Ginzburg’s statements on the
necessary interdependence of aesthetics and functional design, from the interior to the
exterior. Built to contain apartments, as well as dormitory rooms arranged in a communal
living system, the interior was meticulously designed, like that of many Constructivist
buildings. The main structure, adjoined at one end by a large block for communal
services, rested on (now enclosed), and the structure culminated in an open-frame
solarium. The front, or east, facade of the building is defined by the sweep-ing horizontal
lines of window strips and, on the lower floors, of connecting balconies.

Ginzburg’s concept of functionalism for the Narkomfin project shows similarities to
the work of Gropius and De Stijl. The closest affinity, however, is with Le Corbusier’s
notion of the Unite d’Habitation. (Le Corbusier and Ginzburg were personally
acquainted, and in 1927 the French architect was included on the board of __) Larger
communal apartment buildings of the period were necessarily less refined in detail, yet a
few examples, such as Ivan Nikolaev’s massive eight-story dormitory (1000 rooms, each
six square meters, for 2000 students) built in 1929-30 on Donskoi Lane in south
Moscow, were strikingly futuristic in the streamlined contours of their machine-age
design.

Other notable examples of Constructivist architecture in Moscow include the Izvestiia
Building (1927) by Grigory Barkhin (1880-1969), the Zuev Workers’ Club (1927-29) by


Ilya Golosov (1883-1945), the State Trade Agency (1925-27) in Gostorg by Boris
Velikovsky (1878-1937), and the Commissariat of Agriculture (1929-33) by Aleksei
Shchusev (1873-1949).

The most productive proponents of Constructivism were the Vesnin brothers: Leonid,
Viktor, and Alexander. Among their most significant works are the Mostorg Department
Store (1927-29), the club for the Society of Tsarist Political Prisoners (1931-34), and a
large complex of three buildings (1932-37) to serve as a workers’ club and House of
Culture for the Proletarian District, a factory and district in southeast Moscow.

Constructivism was by no means confined to Moscow. Many other Soviet cities, such
as Leningrad, Nizhnii Novgorod (or Gorky), Sverdlovsk, Novosibirsk, Kazan, and
Kharkov, saw the implementation of major projects that illustrated the extent to which
ideas developed by the Constructivists had been assimilated into architectural practice. In
Kharkov a massive complex of several buildings known as the State Industry Building
(Gosprom, 1926-28) was designed by an architectural team headed by Sergei Serafimov
(1878-39). In Sverdlovsk, whose entire city center was redesigned with the participation
of architects such as Moisei Ginzburg, a large housing and office development known as
Chekists’ Village (1929-38) was designed by I.Antonov, V.Sokolov, and A.Tumbasov.

In Leningrad, which under the direction of Sergei Kirov had begun to recover from its
precipitous economic and political decline following the revolution, Constructivist
architecture was particularly noticeable in the design of administrative and cultural
centers for the city’s largest outer districts, where workers’ housing was under
construction. (The historic central districts of the city remained largely intact by virtue of
a comprehensive preservation policy and the limited resources of an abandoned capital.)

One of the earliest examples of Constructivism in Leningrad was the Moscow-Narva
District House of Culture (1925-27; later renamed the Gorky Palace of Culture) by
Alexander Gegello (1891-1965) and David Krichevsky. Essentially a symmetrical
structure designed around a wedge-shaped amphitheater of 1900 seats, the compact
building demonstrated the beginnings of a functional monumentality dictated by actual
circumstances—ignored in the earlier Workers’ Palace and Palace of Labor competitions.

The construction of a number of model projects occurred in the same district,
including workers’ housing (1925-27) by Gegello and others on Tractor Street, and a
department store and “factory-kitchen” (1920-30; to eliminate the need for cooking at
home) in a streamlined early Bauhaus style by Armen Barutchev (1904—76) and others,
and the Tenth Anniversary of October School (1925-27) designed by Alexander
Nikolsky on Strike Prospekt. The centerpiece of the district (subsequently renamed
Kirov) was the House of Soviets (1930-34) designed by Noi Trotsky (1895-1940). Its
long, four-story office block, defined by horizontal window strips, ends on one side in a
perpendicular wing with a rounded facade and on the other in a severely angular ten-story
tower with corner balconies.

A similarly austere, unadorned style emphasizing the basic geometry of forms was
adopted by Igor Ivanovich Fomin (1903—) and A.Daugul (1900-41) for the Moscow
District House of Soviets (1931-35) on Moscow Prospekt. Yet the facade, composed of
segmented windows of identical size, signifies the repetition of an incipient bureaucratic
style rather than the streamlined dynamic of earlier Constructivist work.

Despite the appearance of late examples of Constructivist architecture, such as the
Pravda Building (1931-35) by Panteleimon Golosov (1882-1945), Soviet architectural


design during the 1930s increasingly adopted historicist approaches to the articulation of
structure, whether derived from variants of neoclassicism or skyscraper Gothic. Only in
the 1960s did critical interest in Constructivist concepts and innovations begin to revive.

Although the Constructivist legacy was long ignored in the Soviet Union, it must be
emphasized that Constructivism and the related art of the avant-garde experienced
considerable success in Europe. Lissitzky, who spent 1922-25 in Germany, served
admirably as a propagandist for the movement, and ties between INKhUK and the
Bauhaus were close. During the 1920s many Russian artists active at VEhUTEMAS and
INKhUK visited the West (Kandinsky, Malevich, Gabo, and Pevsner), while Western
architects visited, and in many cases worked in, the Soviet Union (Bruno Taut, Ernst
May, Erich Mendelsohn, and Le Corbusier). Exhibitions of modernist Soviet art were
held in various European cities as well as in New York, and Western journals, such as
and wrote of Constructivism and of the latest developments in Russian architecture.
Western interest in the legacy of Constructivism continues to this day in the form of
numerous publications and major museum exhibitions devoted to the work of the
Constructivists.

WILLIAM C.BRUMFIELD
Ginzburg, Moisei (Russia); Mendelsohn, Erich (Germany, United

States); Russia/Soviet Union; Taut, Bruno (Germany); Vesnin, Alexander,

Leonid, and Viktor (Russia)

Further Reading

Constructivism is likely the most extensively studied topic within Russian architectural
history. Western scholars, as well as Russian specialists such as Khan-Magomedov, have
written prolifically on the movement as a whole and on specific architects and artists
associated with it.
Barkhin, M.G., et al. (editors), (Masters of Soviet Architecture on Architecture), 2
vols., Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1975
Bliznakov, Milka, “The Realization of Utopia: Western Technology and Soviet Avant-
Garde Architecture,” in edited by William Brumfield, New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1991
Borisova, Elena A., and Tatiana P.Kazhdan, (Russian Architecture of the End of
the 19th Century and the Beginning of the 20th), Moscow: Izd-vo “Nauka,” 1971
Brumfield, William Craft, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press,
1993
Brumfield, William Craft, and Blair A.Ruble, Washington, D.C.: Woodrow
Wilson Center Press, and Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993
Cohen, Jean Louis, Brussels: Mardaga, 1987; as translated by Kenneth
Hylton, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1991
Cooke, Catherine, London: Academy Editions, 1995
Ginzburg, Moisei Jakovlevich, Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe Izdatelstvo, 1924; as
translated by Anatole Senkevitch, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1982
Khan-Magomedov, Selim O., New York: Rizzoli, 1986

Khan-Magomedov, Selim O., translated by Alexander Lieven, edited by
Catherine Cooke, New York: Rizzoli, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1987
Khazanova, V.E., (Soviet Architecture of the First Years of October, 1917-1925),
Moscow: Nauka, 1970
Kopp, Anatole, London: Academy Editions, and New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1985
Lissitzky, El, Vienna: Schroll, 1930; as translated by Eric Dluhosch,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London: MIT Press, 1970
Lodder, Christina, | New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1983
Paperny, Vladimir, Ann Arbor, Michigan: Ardis, 1984
Riabushin, A.V., and N.L.Smolina, New York: Rizzoli, 1992
Senkevitch, Anatole, Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1974
Tupitsyn, Margarita, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1999

CONTEMPORARY CITY FOR THREE
MILLION INHABITANTS

Urban design by Le Corbusier, 1922

Exhibited in 1922 at the Salon d’Automne in Paris, the Contem-porary City for Three
Million Inhabitants was Le Corbusier’s first comprehensive urban-planning project.
Accompanied by a 100-square-meter diorama, it consisted of a rigidly geometric,
centralized orthogonal plan with monumental axes, uniform modern buildings, vast
expanses of open space covering 85 to 95 percent of the surface, and a system of
highways. The project was seen simultaneously as a breathtaking modern vision and as
the destruction of the familiar urban setting. Influence on the project ranged from
American gridded cities, Peter Behrens’ work, and Tony Garnier’s 1901-04, 1917; An
Industrial Town) to Bruno Taut’s Utopian (1919; The City Crown). By 1922 Le
Corbusier was one of the major figures of the Modern movement, and the Contemporary
City marked a high point in a period of extraordinary activity. It incorporated two ideas
that he had been developing since 1915. One was the a city built on stilts, which had
independent skeletons rather than supporting walls and was in-spired by Eugéne
Hénard’s (1910; Street of the Fu-ture). The other was the Dom-ino House, which would
be the basis of most of his houses up to 1935. While developing a standardized, universal
house form, he also sought to develop the urban context of his architecture. The
Contemporary City was aimed at achieving fundamental, standardized principles of town
planning.

Four times the size of Manhattan, the City consisted of a series of concentric,
rectangular belts. At the center was the ad-ministrative and business section of 24
cruciform 60-floor towers that were spaced far apart. Their plan profile recalled Khmer or
Indian temple forms and symbolized the centrality of the secular power of control. The
towers had evolved from the ideas that Le Corbusier had published in in 1921, follow-
ing the suggestions of Auguste Perret. The cruciform tower was opposed to the American


skyscraper, which in 1920 appeared as a viable urban form. What was new was not the
cruciform shape but the rigid geometry that was part of the purist machine aesthetic.

The next two rings contained residential blocks of six stacked-up duplexes with
garden terraces that were either grouped around vast interior courtyards or arranged in a
linear pattern of “setback,” or formation. Each repre-sented a different conception of the
city. In the former the cellular perimeter blocks formed streets, with the vertical plane
form-ing both a barrier and a linking screen. The blocks, taken from Heénard,
represented the wall-less, “antistreet” idea. They were to allow for a maximum of open
view, lighting, variation, and rhythm. This open-city idea would culminate in the Ville
Radieuse (Radiant City), an elevated city with a continuous park at the ground level.
Surrounding the residential area of the Con-temporary City was a wide greenbelt, beyond
which lay garden cities for workers and industrial districts, a port, or a sports complex.

The an adaptation of the Citrohan House, is the most enduring contribution of the
Contemporary City. The was worked out in detail and exhibited as the Pavilion of
L’Esprit Nouveau in 1925. It contributed to the formation of the five essential elements
that Le Corbusier published in 1926 as (Five Points for New Architecture): the free
plan; free facade; long, horizontal sliding windows; and roof garden. Both the cruciform
towers and the apartment blocks posed a possible rational solution to the urban problems
of overcrowding and traffic congestion. Although Le Corbusier’s emphasis on air, light,
and greenery recalled the garden city, his solution was radically different in its emphasis
on centralization and increased densities. Another major aim of the project was
facilitating traffic. Fast automobile traffic was completely separated from the pedestrian
traffic. Elevated highways intersected the city and were joined to a peripheral highway
system. Pedestrian traffic was to take place amid parks and gardens. Despite the abstract
and general character of the Contemporary City, its program addressed the postwar
situation of Paris. Next to the Contemporary City, Le Corbusier exhibited a small sketch
proposing an adaptation of the plan to the situation of Paris. In 1925 the reorganization of
Paris was the theme of the Voisin Plan for Paris.

The influence of the Contemporary City was immense. As Le Corbusier remained an
outsider of the planning establishment and received few design commissions, his
influence was largely indirect. Yet the Contemporary City formed the basis of one of the
most pervasive urban images of the 20th century, a conception of environment that
underlay every radical major city plan discussed through the 1960s. The project
synthesized many prevalent concepts of urban design, including the idea that the modern
city represented a problem to be solved and the idea of the separation of the road,
pedestrian route, and buildings.

Although much more developed than most precedents, the Contemporary City
contained Utopian and dystopian characteristics. Many streets would, in reality, be
practically empty of pedestrians. Related is the preoccupation with nature. Derived partly
from the tradition of Parisian urban planning incorporating public gardens, the idea of
bringing nature into the city was more philosophical than practical and reflected Le
Corbusier’s deep belief in nature and an interest in broad vistas. In practice, from the
office high-rises one would lose any contact with nature. Amid the lower, residential
blocks, the parks had a more useful function. Whereas Le Corbusier continuously
evolved any given type, unfortunately the midcentury American urbanrenewal projects


ignored Le Corbusier’s and only replicated the towers, which now served as the mode!
for social housing.

The undifferentiated open space also posed difficulty in developing varied types and
sizes of open space for a range of uses. Moreover, one of the most decisive consequences
of the cutting off of the building from the land was the separation of architecture and
landscape design, which in practice made the total environment suffer. Not only shortfalls
but the apparent success of large-scale planning has also generated concern. The
philosophy underlying the Contemporary City was inspired by regional syndicalism
emphasizing the idea of participation and the Fourierist notion of harmony and
collaboration. Ideologically, the Contemporary City was a middle-class utopia of social
order based on management and technology that prefigured the cities of the industrialized
world in the post-World War II era.

HAZEL HAHN
Apartment Building; Behrens, Peter (Germany); Cité Industrielle, Une
(1901-04); Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Dom-ino
Houses (1914-15); Garnier, Tony (France); Taut, Bruno (Germany); Ville
Radieuse (c.1930)

Further Reading

Benton, Tim, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1987
Blake, Peter, New York: Knopf, 1960
Curtis, William J.R., Oxford: Phaidon, and New York: Rizzoli, 1986
Etlin, Richard A., Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1994
Frampton, Kenneth, New York: Thames and Hudson, 2001
Le Corbusier, edited by Jacques Guiton, translated by Margaret Guiton, New
York: Braziller, 1981
Lucan, Jacques, editor, Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1987
Moos, Stanislaus von, Frauenfeld, Switzerland: Huber, 1968; as Cambridge,
Massachusetts and London: MIT Press, 1979
Moos, Stanislaus von, editor, Berlin: Ernst, 1987
Passanti, Francesco, “The Skyscrapers of the Ville Contemporaine,” 4 (1987)
Raeburn, Michael, and Victoria Wilson, editors, London: Arts Council of Great
Britain, 1987
Serenyi, Peter, editor, | Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, and London: Prentice Hall,
1975
Turner, Paul Venable, New York: Garland, 1977

CONTEXTUALISM

For many centuries architectural theory and practice have regarded the contextual
compromise of architecture with its urban, regional, and sociocultural setting as a basic
demand. Alberti’s definition of the logical and necessary connection between urban and

architectural design was long a guideline for integral city planning. Nevertheless, extreme
urban growth and concentration of rural masses in late 19th-century cities challenged
traditional models of urban contextuality, producing vast standardized speculative
housing units and industrial facilities. Defining new architectural and urban concepts to
guarantee identification of the city’s inhabitants became a central topic of 20th-century
architectural debates. Against the strict geometric patterns of new urban agglomerations,
Camillo Sitte in 1889 proposed a structural revitalization of traditional, picturesque
cityscapes. His proposal influenced the planning of new urban quarters in the early 20th
century as well as Postmodern debates of the 1980s. Avant-garde planners of the 1920s,
especially Le Corbusier and Ludwig Hilberseimer, rejected Sitte’s ideas and instead
proposed a radical new paradigm composed of semi-industrial, standardized architectural
elements in functionally separated and geometrically ordered spaces that dismissed all
relation to the city’s history. Only after the destruction of European cities during World
War II could these modernist planners realize their ideas on a scale beyond that of a few
prewar suburban housing developments . Modernist postwar reconstruction in West
Germany, urban renewal in the United States, crude modernization programs in Latin
America (including Mexico, Venezuela, and Brazil), and Soviet functionalism during the
Khrushchev administration in the 1960s fostered supposedly rational standards in
urbanism and architecture. Their prefabricated boxlike buildings in open, linear, and one-
dimensional spaces virtually required the destruction of the city’s existing, contradictory,
but memorable structural contexts. Historical monuments and traditional city cores lost
their function as cultural orientation points and sites of social identification.

Nevertheless, with few exceptions (such as the ideal modernist city of Brasilia,
Brazil), urban reality confirmed the city’s capacity to adapt even contrasting urban
patterns. When modern urban elements were implanted in historic settings, the result was
a kind of collage with both isolated elements and other features that were integrated into
a new concept of spatial references. Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter’s emphasized several
contemporary revisions of modern architecture and urbanism. These included late
modernist dissidents of Team X centered around Aldo van Eyck, Aldo Rossi’s treatise
(1966), and later Robert Venturi’s (1966). These theoretical approaches recognized
the city’s multidimensionality and rejected dogmatic and exclusive modernist concepts.
Contextualism as a method of architectural planning tended to respect the architectural
heritage and interpret its complex relation within the urbanistic frame. In aesthetic
fractures and structural conflicts were rehabilitated as creative forces in the contemporary
design process. Even the monuments of modern architecture and commercial vernacular
buildings formed part of a new, intricate, and vivid urban network that was meant to
inspire various processes of identification. Based on empirical and psychological studies
of the city form—elaborated mainly by Kevin Lynch and supported by Michel Foucault’s
philosophical idea of the “heterotopia”—contextualism since the 1960s became an
important paradigm in urban and architectural thinking.

The two most influential architectural tendencies of the last three decades of the 20th
century were Postmodernism and deconstructivism. Both used and transformed the idea
of contextualism. Postmodern architectural thought and ideology reduced the complexity
of the concept to a mere retrospective view of historically isolated forms and images of
the preindustrial city. Prince Charles’s with its anti-Modern tone, tried to revitalize
neoclassical harmony of architecture and the urban setting. The long-term effect of


Postmodern contextualism can be seen in the “New Urbanism” of the 1990s, which
attempted to replicate and codify urban patterns of the 19th and early 20th centuries, as in
Celebration (Florida), built by the Disney Corporation.

By contrast, deconstructivist architectural thought interpreted contextualism within
less-obvious references and relations of the urban texture. Peter Eisenman’s designs—
such as the City of Culture of Galicia in Santiago de Compostela, Spain (2000-
present)—demonstrate that deconstructivist contextualism tends to be self-referential,
nonintegrative, or even superficial.

At the end of the 20th century, fragmentation and dissolution of urban contexts were
caused mainly by megaprojects, such as shopping malls or spectacular museum buildings
sited in degenerated urban landscapes (such as the Bilbao port area in Spain that was
radically altered by Frank Gehry’s 1997 Guggenheim Museum). These globalized
megaprojects often ignore the historical complexity and structural diversity of the site-
specific contextualism and question subtle balances of the collage city.

Despite European trends of the 1990s—as in Berlin after the German reunification or
in the Olympic city of Barcelona—to reanimate the characteristic metropolitan urbanism
of 1900, fragmentation became the dominant mode of architectural theory and practice.
Contextualism at the beginning of the 21st century still bears symbolic importance for the
social constitution of city culture and, moreover, became a matter of urban ecology.
Faced with potential global hyperurbanization, ecology as a universal discipline
continues to stimulate reflection on contextualism.

PETER KRIEGER

Brasilia, Brazil; Celebration, Florida; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-
Edouard) (France); Deconstructivism; Eisenman, Peter (United States);
van Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands); New Urbanism; Postmodernism;
Regionalism; Rossi, Aldo (Italy); Rowe, Colin (United States); Team X
(Netherlands); Venturi, Robert (United States)

Further Reading

Corbusier, Le, New York: Payson and Clarke, 1929
Cullen, Gordon, London, 1961

HRH The Prince of Wales, London, New York, Toronto, Sydney, Auckland, 1989
Koolhaas, Rem, and Bruce Mau, edited by Jennifer Sigler, New York: Monacelli
Press, 1995

Lynch, Kevin, | Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1960
Rowe, Colin, and Fred Koetter, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1978
Rossi, Aldo, Padua: Marsilio, 1966
Valena, Tomas, Berlin: Ermst und Sohn, 1994
Venturi, Robert, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1966

COOK, PETER (1936—) AND CHRISTINE
HAWLEY

Architects, Great Britain

Peter Cook is best known as a member of the infamous (but famously talented and far-
reaching) collaborative, Archigram. After studying architecture at the Bournemouth
College of Art and the Architectural Association in London under Peter Smith-son, Cook
worked at the office of James Cubitt and Partners in London.

In the early 1960s Cook, along with Ron Herron and Michael Webb, self-published
the journal . More than a critical review of architecture, the magazine served as a vehicle
to exhibit their own futuristic house and urban plans through their beautiful, colorful,
collaged drawing styles. The group was formalized as Archigram Architects in 1968—a
partnership that lasted through 1976. The power of the Archigram group, as Cook has
said, was “its creative creation of the antidote to boredom.”

In 1976 Cook opened a practice with his former student Christine Hawley. Though
many of their collaborative efforts remain strictly in the “project” category, Cook’s own
work is still geared toward the city and echoes Archigram’s experimental city studies.
“At various times I have delighted in the idea of the anti-city,” he says. “Plugged-In,”
“Instant,” and “Layered” are just a few of Cook and Hawley’s joint, unbuilt projects.

Cook has had several teaching appointments at the Architectural Association in
London, where he still works as a consulting critic. He is presently professor of
architecture and head of the department of architecture at both the Bartlett School of
Architecture of the University College in London and at the Staedelschule in Frankfurt.
Christine Hawley is professor of architectural studies and dean at Bartlett School of
Architecture, where they both encourage experimental student work. The few built
projects the two have embarked on exhibit a broader design than their imaginary cities, in
spite of the built work’s logistical constrictions.

EUGENIA BELL

Archigram

Further Reading

Cook, Peter, | London: Studio Vista/St. Martin’s Press, 1975
Cook, Peter, London: Architectural Monographs Academy Editions, 1993
Cook, Peter (editor), New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999
Cook, Peter, and Rosie Llewellyn-Jones, | New York: Rizzoli, 1991
Tokyo: A+U, 1989

COOP HIMMELB(L)AU

Architecture firm Austria

The Viennese architecture and design firm Coop Himmelb(l)au was founded in 1968
by Wolf D.Prix and Helmut Swiczinsky. The name Coop Himmelb(l)au (Heavenly Blue
Cooperative or Heavenly Building Cooperative) is a play on words that reflects the
linguistic and philosophical nature of their work best expressed through the postwar
international deconstructivist movement.

The roots of Coop Himmelb(l)au’s work are markedly futuristic and organic. Well-
known early projects include the Reiss Bar (1977) and the club café Roter Engel (1981),
with its fractured and fissured facade in the First District of Vienna, as well as the
inventive Humanic shoe store branches (1979-81) in Vienna and in Mistelbach. The
Kon’yo Arts and Crafts Shop in Tokyo (1986) and the two Funderwerk factory-glazed-
entry additions in St. Veit/Glan (1988) are also significant statements of their design
thinking.

The Falkestrasse rooftop addition of 1988 in Vienna, with its winglike winter garden
roof and aquiline attitude, created an international sensation, raising the international
community’s awareness of Coop Himmelb(1)au as an established design entity.

Coop Himmelb(])au’s 1987 competition-winning entry for the new town of Melun-
Senart, located on the southern periphery of Paris, is an urban-planning scheme to
connect three small settlements. The three-phase proposal defined a triangular region
composed of a dense settlement node completed by radial “force lines” created by the
TGV railway lines and the N6 emanating from this center. A “web” of streets of small
houses would be built, and two dense “beams” of loft apartments would be interlaced
with the scheme, activating the urban environment. Finally, the long housing blocks
would also be vertically separated and horizontally interconnected to allow for enhanced
public circulation.

In 1987 Coop Himmelb(l)au developed a challenging scheme for the renovation of the
classical Viennese theater, the Ronacher. A modern and flexible theater facility was to be
located in a strictly historically protected 19th-century theater facade. Coop
Himmelb(1)au created the perfect inwardly turned “black box” environment—high-tech
and accessible for both the public and its personnel. The opening of a multilevel interior
volume and utilization of a flexible assembly system for the stages ensured that spaces of
differing sizes could be custom configured. Additionally, two restaurants and bars were
planned to alleviate high-traffic conditions. The tension and the counterbalancing forms
to ease this transition are clearly evident in the execution of the added facade elements
that function as vertical circulation to the roof terrace with its open-air stage, videothek,
and café/ bar. The rooftop theater, with new stage house below, cantilevers and pivots
over the classic Ronacher’s roof, sheltering the terrace and adding to the drama of the
interplay of old and new.

The Groniger Museum’s East Pavilion (1993-94) was Coop Himmelb(lau’s
contribution to a tripartite museum scheme with overall design by Studio Mendini, Milan,
Italy. In the museum the need for spatial exhibition volumes using natural light and
artificial lighting was combined with the primary intention of providing multiple
viewpoints from which to experience the art. The flexible exhibition system that
comprises the “interior skin,” as well as the varying levels of the interior circulation,
allows the possibility of several viewing platforms from which a given work of art can be
experienced. The museum was prefabricated and was assembled economically, using


computer-directed shipbuilding methods. The original architectural sketch was greatly
enlarged to create the evocative signature graphic on the exterior.

The commanding UFA Cinema Center (1998) in Dresden, Germany, sited on an
unusual polygonal area, directly addresses with its crystalline lobby void the solid drum-
shaped kinetoscope of the former UFA Palace. The building, which houses eight cinemas
in its solid mass, acts as a foil to the glazed atrium volume of the lobby with its
circulation canyon of staircases and lift shafts. The café spaces located on the ground
floor, combined with the hourglass-shaped suspended bar composed of tension cables and
rings, provide quiet zones in the public interior, allowing the lobby to be reacted to in an
urban manner as one would a “passage.” The constant movement of movie patrons and
casual visitors electrifies the space, as persons are in perpetual movement through the
lobby as if in a clockwork.

Located in the southern Simmering district, the Gasometers (the original
natural gas depot for Vienna) now stand void of their equipment. In 1999
one of four aligned cylindrical brick masonry buildings with spacious
interior atrium volumes was developed for adaptive reuse. Coop
Himmelb(l)au’s proposal includes commercial space and maintains
cultural activities in areas that attend the new residential spaces. The
multipurpose utilization, combined with spatial density, creates a complex
urban node on the periphery that is strengthened by its prominent
historical reference. Buried in the body of the Gasometer volume is an
encapsulated theater rising in height to the equiva-

Groninger Museum, the Netherlands
(1993-94)

© Margaritha Spiluttini. Photo
courtesy Coop Himmelb(lau

lent of three adjacent levels. Adjoining the theater is commercial and entertainment space
that includes a café with an underground garage directly below. From this base the |5-
story apartment tower grows. The semicircular plan is concealed behind a clamshell-
shaped curtain wall that allows light penetration whereas atrium views allow sunlight to
penetrate through the dome of the Gasometer.

Showcased under a great arcing roof floating above the spacious plaza level, Coop
Himmelb(l)au’s Entertainment and Shopping Complex is one of nine buildings being
developed by a team of prominent international architects for the JVC Center in
Guadalajara, Mexico (in planning). Sixteen cinemas, along with diverse restaurants and
clubs, exist as independent solid elements punctuating the volume between the ground
plane and the protective sun-filtering roof. Vertical circulation in the solids is clustered
with restaurants and clubs, and a series of connecting cross-decks unites the multiple
solids on a variety of different levels. One of the most prominent of the structures, a
structurally complex twisting “beak,” dramatically cantilevers over a serenely expansive
reflecting pool, mirroring its arc in reverse and providing a respite from the center’s
activities. In addition to architecture and design, Coop Himmelb(l)au has developed a
portfolio of household products and furnishings, thus completing a diverse and
comprehensive architectural practice.

CELESTE M.WILLIAMS AND DIETMAR E.FROEHLICH

Deconstructivism

Biographies
Wolf D.Prix

Bom in Vienna, 13 December 1942. Attended the Technische Universitat, Vienna.
Founding partner of Coop Himmelb(lau 1968. Professor of a master class of
architecture, Hochschule fiir Angewandte Kunst, Vienna 1990; visiting professor,
Southern California Institute of Architecture, Los Angeles; visiting professor,
Architectural Association, London; visiting professor, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

Helmut Swiczinsky

Born in Poznan, Poland, 13 January 1944. Attended the Technische Universitat, Vienna.
Founding member, Coop Himmel-b(l)jau 1968. Visiting professor, Architectural
Association, London.

Frank Stepper

Born in Stuttgart, Germany, 1955. Attended the Technische Universitat, Stuttgart.
Partner, Coop Himmelb(l)au from 1989. Studio instructor, Southern California Institute
of Architecture, Los Angeles.

Coop Himmelb(lau

Established in Vienna in May 1968 by Wolf D.Prix, Helmut Swiczinsky, and Rainer
Michael Holzer; Holzer resigned in 1971; Frank Stepper joined the firm in 1989. An
office in Los Angeles was opened in 1987; honorary member, Ehrenmitgliedschaft bei
dem Deutscher Bund 1989; exhibited in London 1988, Museum of Modern Art, New
York 1989, Osaka 1990, Paris 1993.

Selected Works

CM Pavilion for Cincinnati Milacron, Diisseldorf, Birmingham, 1974, 1977, 1979
Reiss Bar, Vienna, 1977

Humanic-Filiale, Mistelbach, Austria, 1979

Humanic-Filiale, Vienna, 1981

Roter Engel, Vienna, 1981

Atelier E.Baumann, Vienna, 1985

Loft Zugmann, Vienna, 1985

Passage Wahliss, Vienna, 1986

Kon’yo Shen’the, Tokyo, 1986

Direktionsetage ISO-Holding AG, Vienna, 1986

Dachausbau Falkestrasse, Vienna, 1988

Groninger Museum, East Pavilion, Groningen, The Netherlands, 1994
Biiro- und Forschungszentrum Seibersdorf, Seibersdorf, Austria, 1995
Biennale Pavilion, Venice, 1995

SEG Wohnturm, Vienna, 1997

UFA Palast Dresden, Dresden, 1998

Selected Publications

45 (December 1995)
“Coop Himmelb(l)jau: Gasometer B2, Simmering, Vienna, Austria,” 48 (March 1996)
“Coop Himmelb(l)au: Groninger Museum, Groningen, Netherlands 1993-1994,” 310/7
(July 1996)

Berlin: Aedes Galerie fiir Architektur und Raum, 1984
Vienna: Galerie im Taxispalais, 1975
translated by Jo Steinbauer and Roswitha Prix, New York: Rizzoli, 1983
1988

1990
2nd edition, edited by Oliver Gruenberg, Robert Hahn, and Doris Knecht, 1992

_— 1996

Further Reading

Graz, Austria: Galerie H, 1980
Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1992

De Sessa, Cesare, Turin, Italy: Testo e Immagine, 1998
Hamburg, Germany: Galerie Kunst+ Architektur, 1985

Feuerstein, Giinther, and Christiane Feuerstein, (trilingual
English-Italian-German edition), Klagenfurt, Austria: Ritter Verlag, 1996
Freireiss, Kristin, and Hans Jirgen Comerell (editors), Berlin: Galerie Aedes
East, 1998

Vienna: 1973
Giovannini, Joseph, “Art with Attitude: Groninger Museum, Groningen, Netherlands,”
(September 1995)
Noever, Peter (editor), Munich: Prestel, 1991
Noever, Peter (editor), Munich and New York: Prestel, 1996
Papadakis, Andreas, Catherine Cooke, and Andrew Benjamin (editors), New York:
Rizzoli, and London: Academy Editions, 1989
Pearson, Clifford, “Ten Top Firms Shape a Brand New Town at the Edge of
Guadalajara,” (June 1999)
Berlin: Aedes Galerie fiir Architektur und Raum, 1985
“Wie es Euch gefaellt: Theaterprojekt Ronacher, Vienna,” 125/6 (June 1991)

LE CORBUSIER (JEANNERET,
CHARLES-EDOUARD) (FRANCE) 1887-
1965

Architect, France (born in Switzerland)

Le Corbusier (né Charles-Edouard Jeanneret) was born in Switzerland, although he
studied and worked primarily in France. In 1905, when still in his teens, Le Corbusier
was commissioned by one of the trustees at the school where he studied—La Chaux-de-
Fonds—to design the Villa Fallet. Charles |’Eplattenier, a painter and mentor to the
young Le Corbusier, arranged for him to be helped by a local architect, René Chappalaz.
The house was constructed of freestone, rendered and decorated with stylized fir-cone
patterns, with the steep roofs and all-round balcony traditional in the region.

In 1907 the fee for this commission enabled Jeanneret, in the company of fellow
student Léon Perrin, to travel to Italy, where they visited 16 major northern Italian cities,
including Siena, Florence, and Venice. In Tuscany, Jeanneret visited the Carthusian
monastery of Ema, an experience that had a profound effect on him. In late 1907, still in
the company of Perrin, he visited Budapest and then Vienna, where he met Josef
Hoffmann and other members of the Wiener Werkstatte. Two more houses for La Chaux-
de-Fonds were commissioned: the Jaquemet and Stotzer houses. He worked on their
design during a stay in Vienna of four and a half months in 1908, again receiving help
from Chappalaz. Both these houses are of wood and stone, in the regional style.

Later in that year Jeanneret went to Paris, where he approached Franz Jourdain, Henri
Sauvage, Eugene Grasset, and finally Auguste Perret, for whom he worked for 16
months. Another formative influence was that of Tony Garnier, whom he met in Lyons.

Jeanneret returned to La Chaux-de-Fonds in 1909 and joined a group of his former
associates who styled themselves Ateliers d’ Art Réunis. The following year he was given
a grant from the School of Art, on the initiative of L’Eplattenier, to study and to report on
the decorative-arts movement in Germany. He attended the Deutsche Werkbund
Congress in Berlin and acquired a new perspective on the relationship between art and
modern industrial production, which took him even further from his earlier Arts and
Crafts years. Deeply impressed by Peter Behrens’s AEG Turbine Factory, he worked for
five months in his studio, alongside Walter Gropius and Mies van der Rohe, although he
does not appear to have formed close friendships and eventually fell out with Behrens.

In the spring of 1911, Jeanneret left Germany and set off on another major formative
journey that lasted six months: the “voyage d’orient.” Traveling with his friend Auguste
Klipstein, he visited Czechoslovakia, Serbia, Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Greece, and
Italy, which this time included Pompeii and Rome. He returned to La Chaux-de-Fonds in
November to teach and to help form a new design section at the Art School.

The next commission was for a house for his parents in 1912, a medium-size villa
close to the Maisons Fallet, Stotzer, and Jacquemet, with a studio and a music room.
Essentially classical in form, with white cubic and cylindrical forms under a pyramida
roof, it has strong echoes of the houses by Behrens at Hohenhagen that Jeanneret had
visited, in particular the Haus Schroeder. The Villa Favre-Jacot at Le Locle (1912) also
resembles Behrens’s Hohenhagen houses, and the Jura regionalism of the earlier houses
has been wholly abandoned. Aligned along a terrace on a steep hillside and approached
from the side, the striking feature of the composition of this house is the circular court
greeting the visitor, the diameter of which was the turning circle of M.Favre-Jacot’s car.
This courtyard is embraced by concave single-story wings from the body of the house
and counterpointed by the convex entrance porch, which leads inside to a cylindrical two-
story vestibule with a double staircase wrapped around it. The sequence of movement
outside and inside the house is an early expression of one of the most characteristic
elements of the architect’s future buildings: an architectural processional way.

In 1914 Jeanneret visited the Deutsche Werkbund Exhibition in Cologne, the buildings
of which vividly demonstrated the properties of industrial materials such as concrete,
glass, brick, and steel.

At the outbreak of war, which he did not expect to last long, Jeanneret
thought that the first priority would be for rapidly constructed houses in
the devastated areas. With the help of an engineer, Max du Bois, who ran
a reinforced-concrete building firm, he planned the Dom-ino housing type.
Based on a standardized concrete skeleton unit consisting of three
rectangular horizontal slabs supported on six slender stanchions placed
well back from their edges, there were no capitals or beams or transitional
brackets between the vertical pillars and the horizontal planes; the slabs
were quite flat underneath. The three slabs were to be of pot tiles with

steel reinforcement and connected by two dogleg staircases cast as part of


the whole. The exterior skin of windows and walls could be of any
configuration, and the

Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts,
Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts (with Josep Lluis Sert),
1963

© G.E.Kidder-Smith, Courtesty of
Kidder-Smith Collection, Rotch Visual
Collections, M.I.T.

interior partitions might be placed in an infinite variety of ways. This design formed the
nucleus of his later architectural language.

The Villa Schwob (1916), however, in the rue de Doubs, was a major turning point,
the first building that the architect (the later Le Corbusier) considered to be representative
of his oeuvre. From the beginning he conceived the building in terms of a reinforced-
concrete frame with brick in-filling walls. The site slopes steeply away to the south.
Aligned alongside the road, the facade rises straight from the sidewalk. It is a three-story

house flanked by a high wall extending along the street on either side of the entrance; the
single-story kitchen wing, attached to the house, is hidden behind this wall. Behind the
rectangular volume containing the hall and staircase, on the north (or road) side, the basic
form of the house is roughly a cube, but with the addition of two apsidal-ended
projections to the east and west. Inside, the plan is splendidly open, with a two-story-high
central living room, from which the dining room and drawing room open on either side,
terminating in bay windows, and another window, the full height of this space, opens
onto the garden and extended views over the landscape. To the left and right of this
window, the space is open on one side into the library and on the other to a study. The
style is fundamentally one of unadorned classicism, but the house is so subtle and
complex that references in its design have been convincingly identified with buildings as
diverse as Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Michelangelo’s St. Peter’s, and villas by Palladio as
well as contemporary works by Hoffmann and Frank Lloyd Wright. It was the first house
in La Chaux-de-Fonds to have a flat roof.

In the winter of 1916-17, Jeanneret moved to Paris. Max du Bois helped him to find
work as a consultant to the Société d’Applications du Béton Armé. Soon he met the
painter Amédée Ozenfant. Jeanneret began painting seriously in 1918 and, with Ozenfant,
held an exhibition at the Galerie Thomas. They called themselves “purists” and published
their manifesto in the catalog.

Active in a number of unsuccessful business enterprises associated with building
construction, in 1920 Jeanneret, Ozenfant, and Paul Dermée launched the magazine
which ran for 28 issues until 1925. He began at this time to use the name Le Corbusier. In
1922 his first Paris house, the Villa Besnus, was begun, and he set up a studio in
partnership with his cousin Pierre Jeanneret. This was the year he met Yvonne Gallis, a
fashion model, later to be his wife.

The Villa Besnus at Vaucresson was a flat-roofed oblong house with white-painted
smooth cement wall surfaces; the facade was asymmetrical, with horizontal and vertical
strips of windows; a porch with a balcony above and an oriel window project from the
flat rectangular plane. There are no moldings or classical details, and the formal language
is derived from Cubism.

Le Corbusier’s second Paris commission was a studio house for Amédée Ozenfant,
completed in 1924. This cubic building—smooth, white, and with huge metal-framed
windows—had sawtooth factory-style windows as part of its roof, and throughout, the
aesthetic is one of modern industrial engineering. In brilliant counterpoint to the
rectangular forms is the white-walled exterior spiral staircase leading to the entrance.

In 1923 Le Corbusier published based on the articles he had published in. It
rapidly became one of the most influential and widely read architectural writings of the
20th century, with its resonant aphorisms and persuasive rhetoric supported by
powerfully evocative photographs and drawings.

In 1924 the industrialist Henri Frugés, after reading Le Corbusier’s book,
commissioned an estate of houses at Pessac near Bordeaux. It was intended to provide
affordable housing for the Frugés employees and others, as a new garden suburb, but of
the 150 or so dwellings planned, only 51 were built. They were of four types: a row of
houses linked by arcades, detached houses, “gratte-ciel” double houses, and houses
grouped in blocks of six. All were constructed of reinforced-concrete frames with non-
load-bearing walls, continuous ribbon windows, roof gardens, and terraces. The houses


were painted green, red, blue, yellow, and maroon on different sides when finished in
1926. The provision of light and ventilation, terrace space and kitchen, and bathroom and
storage facilities was ahead of its time, but difficulties of construction created severe
financial problems, and the houses were very much modified by later owners. Today they
are being restored.

At the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, Le Corbusier exhibited the
Pavilion de l’Esprit Nouveau, a freestanding villa. The double-height living room had a
gallery at the back, providing kitchen, bathroom, and bedrooms half the height in the
divided space. A prototype from the Immeubles-Villas project of 1922, this interior
arrangement was to remain a favorite theme of the architect. A covered double-height
terrace was to one side, a young tree on the site penetrating through a circular opening in
its roof. Adjacent curved dioramas exhibited the model of the Ville Contemporaine
(1922) and the Plan Voisin. The Plan Voisin was a project to apply the Ville
Contemporaine to the center of Paris and to flatten a vast area just north of the Ile de la
Cité. Eighteen glass skyscrapers and lower housing complexes would be laid out in a
gridiron plan. This scheme provoked much hostility at the time and has always been
difficult to evaluate by later critics.

A twin house, La Roche/Jeanneret (1923-25), was for the Swiss art collector Raoul La
Roche, a bachelor who invested in and for Le Corbusier’s newly married brother
Albert. The two white-painted dwellings blend together as a single composition from the
outside. At right angles to them, across the end of the Square du Docteur Blanche (a
narrow cul-de-sac in the 16th district), La Roche’s studio gallery is a raised, curved,
second-floor form, apparently supported on a single slender pillar. The interior of this
house is celebrated for the complexity and drama of its shapes and spaces, with its three-
story-high entrance hall and the long, curving ramp in the gallery. At the back the
reinforced-concrete construction demonstrates its versatility by allowing for an old tree
growing at an angle from a neighboring garden to be accommodated by modeling a
concave inverted funnel shape into the composition of the building.

Another house in Paris was the Maison Cook (1925-27) at Boulogne-sur-Seine, a
cubic building sandwiched between other houses. It unequivocally expressed Le
Corbusier’s “Five Points of a New Architecture”: the which lifted the building into
space; the whereby interior walls could be arranged at will; the an exterior cladding
free from load-bearing constraints; the — or horizontal band of windows; and the the
flat roof that could be used as a terrace garden. The Maison Planeix (1924-28) has, by
contrast, a formal and symmetrical facade, as does the Villa Church (1928) at Ville
d’Avray. Two houses for the Weissenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart (1926-27), built at the
invitation of Mies van der Rohe and sponsored by the Werkbund, also demonstrate the
Five Points.

The double house Villa Stein/de Monzie (1926-28) at Garches, Les Terrasses, was Le
Corbusier’s most ambitious work yet and was soon recognized as one of his
masterpieces. This palatial and luxurious villa is very complex spatially, inside and out,
with the spectacular orchestration of solid and void climaxing in a series of terraces
descending to the garden in an elegant . Le Corbusier once mentioned his desire to re-
create “the spirit of Palladio,” and it has been shown that the plan, despite its astounding
fluidity, very precisely follows the grid of Palladio’s Villa Malcontenta (1550-60).

The villa Les Terrasses was followed by another, if anything more remarkable for its
beauty and originality: the Villa Savoie (1928-30) at Poissy.

A bitter disappointment for Le Corbusier was his entry for the competition launched in
1926 for the League of Nations Headquarters in Geneva. Although it excited much
favorable interest, his entry was disqualified and finally excluded. He was successful,
however, with his submission to the Soviet Central Union of Consumer Cooperatives
(Centrosoyuz) of designs for their Moscow headquarters, having been invited in 1928 to
participate in a limited competition. Some aspects of this project, a gigantic office
building to accommodate some 3500 employees, echo the League of Nations design. It
was not completed until 1936.

Le Corbusier was a founder/member of Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture
Moderne (CIAM) in 1928 and collaborated with Charlotte Perriand on the design of a
range of tubular steel furniture that continues in to be in production today. The first
volume of his was published in 1929 by Boesiger; Le Corbusier married Yvonne Gallis
and took French nationality the following year.

Between 1929 and 1933, Le Corbusier designed and realized the Cité de Refuge in
Paris for the Salvation Army. This building suffered from grave defects of ventilation,
and Le Corbusier was made to insert opening windows in 1935; he restored the
bombdamaged facade in 1948-52, adding a concrete . A design for the Palace of the
Soviets (1931-32) was rejected in favor of a Russian competition entry in the
Renaissance style.

Over the same period, Le Corbusier was much more successful with the Swiss
Pavilion at the Cité Universitaire (1931-33), a building that had widespread influence
internationally, with its clear separation of parts. A single-story foyer and communal area
of irregular plan (one wall of which is constructed of rough stone) passes underneath the
long rectangular block of dormitories for 51 students, raised on thick which show the
marks of the wooden shuttering into which the concrete was poured. To one side the
curved staircase tower is again a separate entity. The whole building unites and contrasts
curved and straight forms, materials, and surfaces.

In 1936 Le Corbusier worked with Oscar Niemeyer and Lucio Costa on the Ministry
of Education and Public Health building in Rio de Janeiro. His major preoccupation with
urban planning during the period 1931-42 was with plans for the city of Algiers, which
finally came to nothing.

During World War II, under the Vichy government of France, Le Corbusier at first
sought to work for the authorities but was eventually obliged to retreat to Ozon in the
Pyrenees, devoting 1942-44 to painting and writing and beginning to devise the system
of proportion he called “The Modulor.” His cousin Jean, who joined the Resistance,
would not work with him for a number of years after the war because of his attempts to
collaborate.

Soon after the liberation, he was asked by Raoul Dautry, minister of reconstruction, to
design prototypes for mass housing. The result was the Unite d’Habitation at Marseilles
(1947-52), another key building of its time. —rough, boardmarked concrete—was used
for an 18-story block of flats incorporating many services. The concept was inspired by
the ideal of the oceangoing liner and the Phalanstery schemes for communal living
advocated by Charles Fourier in the 19th century. Other versions of the Unité were built

at Nantes-Rezé (1952-53), Briey-en-Forét (1957-61), Firminy-Vert (1965-68), and
Berlin (1957-58).

In 1950 the English architects Edwin Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew proposed to the
Indian authorities that Le Corbusier be invited to work on Chandigarh, a new capital city
for the Punjab. Together with Pierre Jeanneret, he collaborated with these archi tects to
design this vast project, concentrating mainly on the huge and spectacular official
buildings of the Capitol complex. Other major commissions in India followed throughout
the 1950s, notably in Ahmedabad. At the same period, two religious buildings of his in
France, the Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut (1950-55) at Ronchamp and the monastery
of Sainte-Marie de la Tourette (1953-59), were immediately acclaimed.

This fertile period also included the Maisons Jaoul (1956) in Paris, the Brazilian
Pavilion (1959) with Lucio Costa to house Brazilian students at the Cité Universitaire in
Paris, and Le Corbusier’s only American building, the Carpenter Center for the Visual
Arts (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1961-63) with Josep Lluis Sert.

Le Corbusier received the Gold Medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects in
1953 and that of the American Institute of Architects in 1961. Throughout his life he was
inspired by the polarities of the architecture of Mediterranean civilization stretching back
to antiquity and the potential of the most modern technology of his day.

ALAN WINDSOR

AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin; Arts and Crafts Movement; Chapel of

Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp, France; Congrés Internationaux
d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM); Contemporary City for Three Million
Inhabitants; Costa, Lucio (Brazil); International Style; Paris, France;
Parliament Building, Chandigarh; Perriand, Charlotte (France); Sert, Josep
Lluis (United States); Unite d’ Habitation, Marseilles; Villa Savoye,
Poissy, France; Ville Radieuse (c.1930); Voisin Plan for Paris;
Weissenhofsiedlung, Deutscher Werkbund, Stuttgart (1927)

Biography

Born Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, 6 October 1887 in La Chauxde-Fonds, Switzerland;
father was a watch and clock dial painter; mother, née Perret, was a musician. Left
elementary school in 1901 for the School of Art (La Chaux-de-Fonds) to become an
apprentice engraver. Mentored by painter Charles L’Eplattenier. Died 27 August 1965
while swimming at Cap Martin, leaving many unfinished projects.

Selected Works

Villa Faure-Jacot, Le Locle, 1912
Villa Jeanneret, La Chaux-de-Fonds, 1912
Villa Schwob, La Chaux-de-Fonds, 1916
Villa Besnus, Vaucresson, 1922
Ozenfant House and Studio, Paris, 1924

Villas La Roche/Jeanneret, Paris, 1925

Quartiers Modernes Frugés, Pessac, 1926

Houses for the Weissenhofsiedlung, Stuttgart, 1927

Maison Cook, Paris, 1927

Maison Planeix, Paris, 1928

Villa Church, Ville d’Avray, 1928 (destroyed)

Villa Stein/de Monzie, Les Terrasses, Garches, 1928

Villa Savoye, Poissy, 1930

Moscow Headquarters for Centrosoyuz, Moscow, 1936

Cité de Refuge, Paris, 1933

Swiss Pavilion, Cité Universitaire, Paris, 1933
Ministry of Education and Public Health Building, Rio de Janeiro (with
Oscar Niemeyer and Lucio Costa), 1936

Unité d’Habitation, Marseilles, 1952; other versions built at Nantes-Rezé, 1953;
Briey-en-Forét, 1961; Firminy-Vert, 1968; and Berlin, 1958

Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp, 1955

Maisons Jaoul, Paris, 1956

Brazilian Pavilion, Cité Universitaire, Paris (with Lacio Costa), 1959

Monastery of Sainte-Marie de la Tourette, Eveux, 1959

Parliament Building, Chandigarh, 1960

Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts, Harvard University, Garland
Cambridge, Massachusetts (with Josep Lluis Sert), 1963

Further Reading
Benton, Tim, Paris: P.Sers, 1984; translated into English as New Haven,
Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1987
Boudon, P., London: Lund Humphries, 1972
Cohen, Jean-Louis, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1992

Curtis, William J.R., London: Phaidon, 1986
Evenson, Norma, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966

Guiton, Jacques, translated by Margaret Guiton, New York: Braziller, 1981
Moos, S.von, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1979
Rowe, Colin, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1976
Sbriglio, Jacques, Marseilles: Editions Parenthéses, 1992
Serenyi, Peter, | Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1975
Steinmann, Martin, and I.Noseda (editors), (exhib. cat.), Niederteufen: Arthur
Nigli, 1983

Taylor, Brian Brace, | Cambridge, Massachusetts: Carpenter Center, Harvard
University, 1972
Taylor, Brian Brace, Paris: Equerre, 1980; as Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1987
Turner, P.V., New York: Garland, 1977
Walden, R. (editor), Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1977
(exhib. cat.), London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1987

(exhib. cat.), Paris: Caisse Nationale des Monuments Historiques et des Sites, 1988
Le Cobusier, Paris: Vincent, Fréal, 1923; as translated by Frederick Etchells,
London: John Rodker, 1927; frequently reprinted in many languages

Le Corbusier,

Paris: Vincent, Fréal, 1930

Le Corbusier, Paris: Editions de 1’Architecture, 1948; as translated by Peter de
Francia and Anna Bostock, London: Faber and Faber, 1954
Le Corbusier, Paris: 1957; reprinted with a translation by Jacqueline Cullen, Verlag

Gerd Hatje, 1991

8 vols., edited by Willi Boesiger, Zurich: Girsberger, 1930 onward: Vol. 1 1910—
29, Vol. I] 1929-34, Vol. III (edited by Max Bill) 1934-38, Vol. IV 1938-46, Vol. V
1946-52, Vol. VI 1952-57, Vol. VII 1957-65, Vol. VIII 1965-69
32 vols., edited by H.A.Brooks, New York: Paris: Foundation Le Corbusier, 1982-84

CORPORATE OFFICE PARK, ESTATE,

AND CAMPUS

Associated largely with the post-World War II era of economic expansion and the
monumental growth in power and size of American business organizations, the
architecture of corporate office parks has its antecedents in designs as different as
Rockefeller Center (1927-45), by Reinhard and Hoffmeister, with H. W.Corbett and
Raymond Hood, in New York City, and Walter Gropius’s Werkbund Factory and
Administration Building (1914) in Stuttgart, Germany. Although corporate office parks
are often reviled today by “signature architects” in favor of other, more prestigious
commissions, many of the early examples of this form of architecture were designed by
such well-known masters as Frank Lloyd Wright and Eero Saarinen.

The history of U.S. corporate office park architecture is tilted toward the second half
of the 20th century. Before 1945 large-scale construction in the United States was slowed
because of the Great Depression, the materials shortages spawned by World Wars | and
IL, and the fledgling (relative to the post-World War II era) nature of the corporate,

Fordist regime of capital

until the 1970s. The development and rise of the corporate

and foremost, by the gr

such growth, corporations saw a need for centralized headqu:

accumulation that would come to d

owth, in both size and wealth, of U

efine the American economy
office park was spurred, first
.S. corporations. Along with
arters that accommodated the

increasing division of labor that such growth necessitated, that provided working spaces

to enforce such hierarc!

hical divisions, and that offered corporations the opportunity to

develop a positive and marketable public image through the design of their offices. The

low-rise and open-plan corporate campus is today a nearly ul

of most U.S. cities.

biquitous presence in suburbs

Aside from the previously mentioned efforts, perhaps the most famous

corporate office park built before World War II was Frank Lloyd Wright’s

Johnson Wax Administration Building (1936-39)

or S.C.Johnson and

Son in Racine, Wisconsin. Modestly described by Wright as “‘one of the
world’s remarkably successful structures,” the curvilinear building is
perhaps best known for the columns that support it. Resembling concrete
mushrooms, the columns were thought insufficiently strong by city
engineers, and Wright had to build a test column to prove that his design
was capable of handling many times the load necessary. The test was, as
we all know, a great success for both Wright and $.C.Johnson and Son.
The publicity surrounding the opening of the building (the image of which
was used in advertising for the company), in the estimates of Johnson
Wax’s own publicity department, was worth around $2 million. The

Procter and Gamble Headquarters,
Cincinnati, Ohio, designed by Kohn,
Pedersen and Fox, 1982-85

© Timothy Hursley

fame that it garnered Wright also played a significant role in advancing his career.

By the late 1940s and early 1950s, a number of American corporations were in the
process of building new headquarters. Unlike their urban predecessors, Rockefeller
Center and the Johnson Wax Administration Building, the majority of these corporate
office parks, exploiting the development of the interstate highway system, were built in
suburban settings. As such, suburban developments, such as the General Motors
Technical Center (1948-56) in Warren, Michigan, materialized a host of complex social
dynamics, including the increasing wealth and prestige of the American corporation, the
appropriation by popular culture of the aesthetic impulses of modernism (the GM
Technical Center was designed by Eliel and Eero Saarinen, whose use of glass and steel
in forms both clean and regular set the standard for many postwar corporate office parks),
the technological advancements made in air conditioning and fluorescent lighting, the
waning political power of urban centers in the postwar economic boom, and the racially
exclusive nature of American society (e.g., by 1960 the GM Technical Center employed
4153 employees; only six were African American). One of the lasting achievements of
Saarinen’s design for General Motors was his ability to create a composition that
suggested the corporation possessed both economic and cultural authority. Eero Saarinen
would employ the same modernist idioms in his designs for other suburban corporate
office parks, including the John Deere and Company Headquarters (1957-63) in Moline,
Illinois, and the IBM Watson Research Center (1957-61) in Yorktown Heights, New
York.

Until the 1970s modernism was the style of choice for the majority of corporate office
parks. As the rest of the architectural world went, however, so too did corporations, and
throughout the 1970s and 1980s a number of office parks were built that are nearly or
wholly Postmodern. These include the Procter and Gamble World Headquarters (1982-
85), designed by Kohn, Pedersen Fox Associates, in Cincinnati, Ohio, and the College
Life Insurance Building (1967-71), by Roche and Dinkeloo, in Indianapolis, Indiana. The
explosive growth of the computer industry in California in the last 30 years spawned a
number of significant office parks in Silicon Valley and surrounding areas. Among the
more famous examples are the IBM Santa Theresa Programming Center (1976) by
McCue Boone Tomsick; the Oracle campus (1989-98) by Gensler Associates, in
Redwood Shores; Electronic Arts (1998) by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, in Redwood
Shores; and Silicon Graphics International (1996) by Studios Architects, in Mountain

View.
BENJY FLOWERS

Further Reading

Book-length studies of corporate office park/estate/campus architecture and history are

still relatively rare. Articles on various aspects of this form, however, are plentiful and

address a variety of technocratic, theoretical, and stylistic issues and concerns.
“Arquitectura dey hoy: Edificios para oficinas,” 27/165 (1994)

Cohn, David, et al., “Corporate Ego: A Thing of the Past?” 64 (March 1998)
Harwood, Elain, “‘Prestige Pancakes’: The Influence of American Planning in British
Industry since the War,” 1 (Summer 1994) (special issue)

MacCormac, Richard, “The Dignity of Office,” 1190/1143 (May 1992)

Schwarzer, Mitchell, “Beyond the Valley of Silicon Architecture: On Architecture and
the Embodiment of Value,” — (Winter/Spring 1999)
Walton, Thomas, New York: Macmillan, and London: Collier-Macmillan, 1988

CORREA, CHARLES MARK 1930-—

Architect, India

In 1958 Charles Mark Correa was awarded two commissions that would showcase his
approach to architecture: the Pavilion for the All India Handloom Board in New Delhi
(1958) and the Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya, a museum and archive at Mahatma
Gandhi’s ashram on the banks of the Sabarmati River in Ahmedabad (1963). Designed
and built in six months, the temporary Handloom Pavilion consisted of a series of stepped
earth-filled platforms contained within a square enclosure of sun-dried bricks and shaded
by freestanding wood and handloom-fabric parasols. The exhibition unfolded as the visi-
tors in the first sequence ascended the platforms and then, in the second sequence,
descended in a spiral manner. The subtle interplay of enclosed and semienclosed spaces
brought about by a shifting axis, later to become a leitmotif of Correa’s work, also
formed the central device in the Gandhi Sangrahalaya.

The existing buildings in Gandhi’s ashram were whitewashed one-story masonry
structures with tiled roofs, some of which had a linear arrangement, while others, such as
Gandhi’s own residence, were wrapped around a small courtyard. Correa’s addition
addressed this typology in an assemblage of pavilions arranged around a central water
court, only four of which, containing archival material, were enclosed. The tiled-roof
structures were supported on a modular system of masonry columns and reinforced-
concrete beams that also served as rainwater conduits. The result was a serene
atmosphere: alternating open and covered spaces, the dapple of light and shade, a few
carefully chosen trees in the courtyards, the reflection of the water, and the breeze from
the river. The profoundly antimonumental gesture of the Gandhi Sangrahalaya, in fact,
monumentalized the “village” idea central to Gandhi’s philosophy. It augmented a
decisive departure in 20th-century architecture from accepted canons of monumentality
and the memorialization of national heroes. These two early projects also challenged the
heroic modernism then unfolding in Chandigarh and Ahmedabad in the works of Le
Corbusier.

In over 140 projects that have followed, Correa has used a minimal set of
formal devices—the stepped platform reminiscent of wells and river ghats,
the open-to-sky space in the form of terraces and courts, the freestanding
parasol roof, the split-level space to minimize full-height walls, the
shifting axis of pedestrian movement, the square module, and the framed
view—to create a complex spatial repertoire. Although the importance of
open-to-sky space takes the form of generous terrace gardens and courts

sculpted from the sloping site and enhanced by judicious framing of the


lake view at Bharat Bhavan in Bhopal (1981), the same principle is used to
carve out double-height garden terraces and provide an environmental
buffer of verandas and service spaces in the high-rise Kanchenjungha
Apartments in Bombay (1983). In both cases it is the subtle manipulation
of the building section belying the apparently simple plan arrangements
that enabled him to attenuate the microclimate and at the same time make
sculptural statements. In the Permanent Mission of India to the United
Nations in New York City (1992) and the Alameda Park Project in Mexico
City (1994-), these spatial voids/framed views became giant “urban
windows”—his signature—that address the urban scale while offering the

Spiral staircase, Inter-University Center for
Astronomy and Astrophysics Photo by Charles
Correa © Aga Khan Award for Architecture

Inter-University Center for Astronomy
and Astrophysics, Pune, view of
courtyard facade (1992) Photo by
Charles Correa © Aga Khan Award for
Architecture

outsider a hint of the layered spaces inside. His formal principles apply as well for a
luxury condominium as they do for low-cost housing. As he noted in a postcolonial
manifesto— (1985)}—both rich and poor, grand monuments and vernacular buildings,
share the same landscape.

His writings presented alternate possibilities for building practice and urban planning.
In an unusual move for an architect, he argued that the solution to the problem of so-
called Third World housing resided not in more innovative technology or new materials
or even better architectural design, but in socio-spatial equity and a great deal of common
sense. He himself, however, designed several low-cost housing schemes (e.g., Belapur,
1986) in response to what he labeled the “belligerently anti-visual” approach to low-cost
housing among architects. His “housing bill of rights” included concepts such as
incrementality, pluralism, identity, income generation, disaggregation, and the “equity
plot”—in urban areas each family should be allotted a plot between 50 and 75 square
meters. Many of his ideas seemed to ignore the complexity of urban problems, and yet he
was fully cognizant of the deep sociopolitical implication of his suggestions. In urging an
integral look at the landscape that would overcome barriers between different institutions
and experts, Correa was essentially questioning the fundamentals of eco nomic and
physical planning theory and the design process that had failed to answer housing needs
around the world—whether in India, the United States, or the former Soviet Union. Many
of his concepts have been successfully used at an architectural scale, but implementation
at an urban level remains unfulfilled. His writing displays a rare clairvoyance and


profound belief in the possibilities of a socialist democracy and the “third option”—the
term “Third World,” he reminded his readers, was coined not to facilitate an ordinal
ranking of nations but to generate the possibility of an alternative, “one different from
Joseph Stalin’s USSR and John Foster Dulles’ USA.”

Since the 1970s, like many architects around the world, Correa has included more

features of popular culture, color, and allusion to enrich his primary architectural
vocabulary, which had already been formulated by the first decade of his practice. The
brilliant color scheme of the tourist resort of Cidade de Goa in Dona Paula (1982) that
exceeded the modernist primary palette was accentuated with trompe I’oeil to create a
“city” that was part imagined, part illusory, and part real. He has successfully used
paintings and sculptures (often in collaboration with well-known artists) to enhance the
spatial architectonics (for example, in the Kala Academy in Panaji, Goa, 1984; the British
Council in New Delhi, 1992; and the Inter-University Center of Astronomy and
Astrophysics in Pune, 1992), and in doing so has been instrumental in resituating painting
as a legitimate accompaniment to contemporary architecture. This interest in popular
sources has also been increasingly accompanied by a vocabulary that attempts to root his
architecture not just in the vernacular but in what he calls the mythic values of Indian
tradition. Not surprisingly, some of this early experimentation in vocabulary (the
“individual suite”; “raised platform”; and “rush mats”) took place in resort hotels that
paid homage to ethnic chic and government patronage of India’s craft tradition. The now
ubiquitous (rectangular pools) and mandalas (cosmic diagrams) appearing in Correa’s
recent projects were most flamboyantly used in the Jawahar Kala Kendra Museum in
Jaipur (1992) with its nine-square mandala plan, stone inlaid symbols of planets, and
brilliantly painted, overscaled murals. When read against the architect’s explanatory
texts, they indicate a complex negotiation between the ascribed position of a Third World
architect, who is expected to express his regional identity (as opposed to a “Western”
architect, who is not), and the desire to supersede such binding propositions.
By aligning the aesthetic inspiration from a local tradition with a universal language of
science and metaphysics, he attempts to reverse the route and the terms through which
universal principles were supposed to enter the world of modern architecture. In a
practice that has spanned four continents and a vast range of government institutions,
corporate offices, museums, hotels, and residential designs, Correa has employed an
architectural syntax that fluidly travels between contexts and serves as one of the most
convincing critiques of the principles of a universalized modernism and its Euro-
American bias.

Apart from his own ruminations on architecture, there are three monographs on Correa
and scores of articles that comment on individual projects, a complete list of which is
available in the 1996 monograph.

SWATI CHATTOPADHYAY

Biography

Born in Hyderabad, India, 1 September 1930. Attended St. Xavier’s College, Bombay
1946-48; studied at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, under Buckminster Fuller
and Walter Sanders 1949-53; received a bachelor’s degree in architecture 1953; studied

at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, under
Buckminster Fuller and Lawrence Anderson 1953-55; received a master’s degree in
architecture 1955. Married Monika Sequeira Kamat 1961:2 children. Partner, G.M.Bhuta
and Associates, Bombay 1956-58. Private practice, Bombay from 1958; chief architect,
City and Industrial Development Corporation, Government of Maharashtra 1971-74.
Albert Bemis Professor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1962; visiting critic,
Graduate School of Design, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1974;
Bannister Fletcher Professor, University College, London 1974; visiting critic, University
of Bombay 1976 and 1977; Arthur Davis Visiting Professor, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana 1979; visiting critic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1981;
visiting critic, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 1982; consultant to UN
University, Tokyo 1982-83; visiting critic, Columbia University, New York 1984.
Fellow, Indian Institute of Architects 1964; member, council, Indian Institute of
Architects from 1964; member, Western Board, Reserve Bank of India from 1973;
member, Steering Committee, Aga Khan Awards, Paris from 1977; honorary fellow,
American Institute of Architects 1979; chairman, National Commission on Urbanization
1985-88; fellow, Royal Institute of British Architects 1993. Gold Medal, Royal Institute
of British Architects 1984; Gold Medal, International Union of Architects 1990; Aga
Khan Award for Architecture 1998.

Selected Works

Handloom Pavilion, Industrial Fair, Delhi, 1958
Gujarat Low-Cost Housing (first prize, competition), Ahmedabad, 1962
Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya (museum and archive addition), Ahmedabad, 1963
ECIL Offices, Hyderabad, 1967
Bharat Bhavan, Bhopal, 1981 Cidade de Goa, Dona Paula, 1982
Kanchenjungha Apartments, Bombay, 1983
Kala Academy, Goa, 1984
Low-Income Housing, Belapur, 1986
British Council, New Delhi, 1992
Inter-University Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune, 1992
Jawahar Kala Kendra Museum, Jaipur, 1992
Indian Mission to the United Nations, New York, 1992
Almeda Park Project, Mexico City, still under construction as of 2001

Selected Publications

1984; revised edition, edited by Hasan-Uddin Khan, 1987

Further Reading

Ashraf, Kazi Khaleed, and James Belluardo (editors), New York: Architectural
League of New York, 1998
Bhatt, Vikram, and Peter Scriver, Ahmedabad: Mapin, 1990
Khan, Hasan-Uddin (editor), revised edition, New York: Aperture, and Singapore:
Concept Media, 1987
Prakash, Vikramaditya, “Identity Production in a Post-Colonial Indian Architecture: Re-
covering What We Never Had,” in edited by Giilstim Baydar Nalbantoglu and Chong
Thai Wong, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997

COSTA, LUCIO 1902-1988

Architect, Brazil

Licio Costa (b.Toulon, France 1902, d. Rio de Janeiro Brazil 1988)
played a seminal role in introducing modern architecture and urbanism to
Brazil. A dedicated teacher, he often included talented younger designers
in important projects. Costa tempered modern European methods with
local materials, building techniques, and vernacular design traditions, thus
contributing significantly to the development of a modern Brazilian
expression. During his lifetime he fostered appreciation for Brazil’s
unique architectural heritage and was active in the historic preservation

movement, particularly in his later years.

As a 1924 graduate of the Escola Nacional de Belas Artes in Rio de Janeiro, he
participated in the neo-Colonial movement. His promise as an articulate designer in that
style helped secure his position as the director of the Escola in 1930 at age 28. Yet
Costa’s interests in such European modernists as Walter Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, and
Le Corbusier were further galvanized by the latter’s brief visit to Rio in 1929. Costa soon
became a major force for the dissemination of the ideas of Le Corbusier and CIAM
(Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne) in Latin America. His reforms at the
Escola included appointments of progressive architects to the faculty to teach modern
design. Costa hired Sao Paulo-based modernist Gregori Warchavchik to teach
architectural composition, and the two established a local practice from 1931 to 1933.
Although popular with students, the new appointments soon aroused the enmity of the
traditional faculty. By year’s end they forced Costa’s resignation. A six-month student
strike ensued, resulting in the retention of many reforms. With Warchavchik, Costa’s
work demonstrates a decidedly International Style flavor. Their innovative Vila Operaria
apartments (1933) in Rio’s Gamboa district with its flat roofs, terraces, and facade of
angled volumes is equal to the best European work of the period.

Despite his commitment to progressive social and architectural ideologies, Costa
steadfastly held that contemporary architects had much to learn from Brazil’s colonial
heritage. Rather than simply copy the past, he sought a modern expression for Brazil’s
architecture, one taking into account the country’s climate, landscape, and unique

melange of indigenous, European, and African cultures. Costa’s neo-Colonial designs
attested to his beliefs. His residence (1942) for Argemiro Hungria Machado in Rio,
although in a traditional style, evinced rational planning and clarity in massing. The
house surrounded a patio and garden, with internal spaces opening freely onto sheltered
external ones. Costa’s residential architecture best characterizes the continuing dialogue
in his thought between modernist theory and local building techniques and traditions.
Costa’s first major commission to draw international attention was his
collaborative design for the headquarters (1936-43) for the Ministry of
Education and Public Health. Disregarding the results of a competition
dominated by traditional architects, Minister Gustavo Capanema requested
Costa to create a design expressing the progressive agenda of his new
ministry. Costa formed a team of local architects, many his former
students, and later secured Le Corbusier’s participation as a consultant. Le
Corbusier’s three-week visit produced two projects, including one for an
alternative site. The Brazilian team (Oscar Niemeyer, Carlos Ledo, Jorge
Moreira, Affonso Eduardo Reidy, and Ernani Vasconcelos) developed one
of these projects for the original site, with significant changes by
Niemeyer. Ricardo Burle-Marx designed the gardens with indigenous
plants, and Candido Portinari ornamented the exterior with traditional-
style tiles. The Ministry constituted one of Brazil’s earliest and most
important modern public buildings. Its native translation of the Le
Corbusian idiom drew widespread attention from the international
architectural press and was much imitated after World War II. Costa again
collaborated with Niemeyer on the Brazilian Pavilion at the New York
World’s Fair in 1939, thus continuing the synthesis of Brazilian and
modernist forms encapsulated in the Ministry building.

Ministry of Education and Public
Health, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
designed by Lucio Costa and Oscar
Niemeyer

© G.E.Kidder Smith/CORBIS

Costa’s designs for multiple dwellings demonstrated his concern for more comprehensive
planning. His Parque Guinle complex (1948-54) included three of six projected
apartment blocks in a verdant setting, closely following ideas suggested by CIAM in the
Athens Charter. The horizontal slab apartments, ranging from seven to eight stories,
included single- and double-level units, open communal areas on the interiors, and
parking at ground level. As usual the architect incorporated indigenous building materials
and forms, including wooden louvers and ceramic tiles. Costa’s design won the award for
multifamily habitations at the First Biennial Exposition in Sao Paulo in 1953.

The architect’s winning design in the 1956 international competition for the Pilot Plan
of Brazil’s new capital secured his fame as an architect and planner. The cross-shaped
organization of Brasilia carefully divided major functions into two main zones, one
official and the other mainly residential. The plan, often likened to the shape of an
airplane, both recalls and far exceeds the scale of Washington, D.C., because of its

monumental axis. This axis terminates in the Plaza of Three Powers, encapsulating the
three branches of government. At the opposite end, government is countered by the mass
media in Costa’s television tower. The “wings” contain apartment blocks interspersed
with small shops, restaurants, and churches. A theater, bus station, shopping malls, and
hotel and banking sectors stand at the intersection of the two axes. Although much
criticized, this city of two million inhabitants presently enjoys lower crime and many
amenities lacking in Brazil’s other crowded urban centers. Costa’s unrealized design
(1968) for the Barra de Tijuca, a suburban beach resort in Rio, offered a comprehensive
development interspersing park spaces and conservation areas with private residences on
a regional scale.

Costa’s lifelong involvement with Le Corbusier has sometimes obscured his central
role in Brazilian modernism in the international arena. Although frustrated by Le
Corbusier’s efforts to take credit for ideas developed by Brazil’s young designers, Costa
remained loyal, collaborating with Le Corbusier in the design of the Brazilian Pavilion
(1956) at the Cité Universitaire in Paris and as an architectural consultant from 1950 to
1953 for the team overseeing the UNESCO seat in Paris. The lack of any major study in
English to date has impeded a broader appreciation and understanding of Costa’s
important contributions as architect, writer, and teacher in the development of modernism
in the mid-20th century.

LINDA S.PHIPPS
Brasilia, Brazil; Brazil; Le Corbusier (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard)
(France); Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Sao Paulo,
Brazil

Selected Works

Vila Operaria apartments (with Gregori Warchavchik), Rio de Janeiro, 1933
Argemiro Hungria Machado Residence, Rio de Janeiro, 1942
Ministry of Education and Public Health Headquarters, Rio de Janeiro, 1943
Brazilian Pavilion, New York World’s Fair (with Oscar Niemeyer), 1939
Parque Guinle Complex, Rio de Janeiro, 1954
Pilot Plan (project) for Brasilia, Brazil, 1956

Barra de Tijuca beach resort (unexecuted), Rio de Janeiro, 1968

Selected Publications

Porto Alegre, Brazil: Centre dos Estudantes Universitarios de Arquitetura, 1962
Sao Paulo: Empresa das Artes, 1995
“In Search of a New Monumentality,” participant in print symposium, (London), 104
(September 1948)
“Raz6des da nova arquitetura,” “Uma escola viva de belas-artes,” “Depoimento de um
arquiteto carioca,” “Autobiografia,” in Alberto Xavier, editor, Sao Paulo:
Associa¢ao Brasileira de Ensino de Arquitetura, 1987

“Memoria del piano piloto de Brasilia,” in edited by Jorge O.Gazaneo, Buenos Aires:
Institute de Arte Americano e Investigaciones Estéticas, 1959
“Comments on Brasilia,” in edited by Aloisio Magalhaes, Philadelphia: Falcon Press,
1959

Further Reading
Bruand, Yves, translated from the French by Ana M.Goldberger, Sao Paulo: Editora

Perspectiva, 1981
Bullrich, Francisco, New York: Reinhold, 1969

Evenson, Norma, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1973
Ferraz, Geraldo, “Warchavchik & Lucio Costa,” in Sao Paulo: Museu de Arte de
Sado Paulo, 1965
Guimoraens, Ceca, de, Rio de Janeiro: Relume Dumara, Prefeitura Rio Arte, 1996

Harris, Elizabeth Davis, “Le Corbusier and the Headquarters of the Brazilian Ministry of
Education and Health, 1936-45,” Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1984.
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955

Mindlin, Henrique, New York: Reinhold, 1956
Santos, Cecilia Rodrigues dos, et al., | Sao Paulo: Tessela, Projecto Editora, 1987

COUNTRY CLUB

From its origins at the end of the 19th century as a converted farmhouse to its maturity as
a fully developed building type, the country club has been most popular in British and
North American locations suitable to the wealthy classes and to the requirements of
outdoor sport. Farmhouses originally met these requirements and were less expensive to
convert and augment than building new structures. At the same time, some members
undoubtedly preferred the ambience of a farmhouse over a new building. While the
farmhouse has continued to serve as a model for clubhouse design, club leaders have
increasingly opted to construct new buildings rather than convert old ones.

When converting a farmhouse into a clubhouse, designers were forced to develop a
site plan that centered on the farmhouse’s location. However, on an undeveloped site the
clubhouse location was determined not only by its proximity to a road but also by how to
develop the best golf course. Using the high ground was a key criterion for engineering a
club’s grounds. The clubhouse had to be on high ground to accommodate sewer and
water needs. The high ground also had to be sufficiently large in area to handle tennis
courts, parking, and auxiliary buildings kept near the clubhouse. Once basic service needs
were met, aesthetics dominated the choice of clubhouse location. The architect located
the clubhouse and designed a landscape to create aesthetic vistas—from the building to
the golf course and vice versa. Because members often wanted the clubhouse to be the
focal point atop a hill, problems of shading and wind were handled through landscaping.


Whereas physical constraints played a role in clubhouse location, aesthetics was the
primary means to convey a prestigious setting.

Although golf was the major outdoor sport at a time when equestrian sports were in
decline, the popularity of tennis led to the building of new and additional tennis courts
that were typically near the clubhouse. In moderate climates a totally new addition was
the swimming pool. The Wichita, Kansas (1913), Peninsula, California (1914), and San
Antonio, Texas (1917), country clubs provided swimming pools with their new
clubhouses. Some clubs, such as Wichita and Ridgewood, New Jersey, provided dance
pavilions for outdoor dances, but most clubs held dances indoors and used verandas and
porticoes as an outer room for fresh air. Although architects introduced some new design
features, automobile sheds, parking lots, and tennis courts were the primary additions that
changed the clubhouse’s outdoor setting.

In the period 1900-20, architectural styling became more important and reflected the
values and lifestyles of the club’s members. Progressing increasingly from remodeled
farmhouses to architect-designed clubhouses, the country club changed in its scale,
setting, and appearance. Some of the oldest institutions, such as the Country Club in
Brookline, remained in converted farmhouses. The prestigious Piping Rock Country Club
of St. Louis, Missouri, built a new two-story clubhouse that was visually modest with
wood-slat siding. In contrast the Bellereive Country Club of St. Louis built a three-story
Georgian brick structure with a clerestory and dome on its roof as well as a large two-
story portico. Clubs with wealthy members could afford grand clubhouses built with
expensive materials and in a style that conveyed a stately appearance.

Architectural styling for country clubs during the early 20th century was diverse. The
Brae Burn and Vesper country clubs in Massachusetts, the Country Club of Virginia in
Richmond, and the Chevy Chase in Washington, D.C., were all designed in a tradition
characteristic of the region. In the Midwest country clubs were designed in a variety of
styles, including Classical Revival, Colonial, Tudor, and Shingle. Midwestern architects
trained in the East undoubtedly imported traditional designs from the East Coast. Some
country clubs in the Southwest and California decided to build clubhouses in the Mission
style, which was indigenous to the region. The San Antonio (1917) and the Santa Barbara
(1918) country clubs both adopted the style, which recognized the region’s ethnic
heritage.

Although the country club was a new American building type, many clubhouse
functions duplicated what earlier city clubs provided. Beyond the obvious needs, such as
a kitchen, plans for many country clubs included a ballroom and stage, bedrooms for
members, and game rooms. Bedrooms continued to be important because of
transportation limitations. At the Houston Country Club, bachelors rented upstairs
bedrooms, as they had done historically in men’s city clubs. Elites still preferred to have
the clubhouse as a place for guests to spend the night. Although the club setting had
changed, many habits of club life remained the same.

In the 1920s there was an increasing demand for architects who were knowledgeable
about clubhouse design. In this prosperous decade, most new clubs could afford a new
clubhouse, especially when club organizers and a real estate developer worked together
to relate the country club’s development to an adjoining elite housing subdivision. Early
country clubs benefited from the initial economy of converting a farmhouse into a


clubhouse. However, with a growing, active membership, a club had to either renovate
the clubhouse or build a new one.

Architects increasingly suggested that the clubhouse’s best location was just below a
hilltop, a location that allowed for air ventilation without the building experiencing
extreme wind velocities. Moreover, locating a clubhouse below the hilltop offered the
possibility of some shading and a scenic backdrop to golfers approaching the clubhouse.
Minimizing the clubhouse’s distance from a main road reduced on-site road construction,
and locating the entrance road on the high ground reduced grading costs and erosion
problems. For the golf course, design ers reiterated the need for the nine-hole loop plan,
the Ist and 10th tees as well as the 9th and 18th greens being near the clubhouse.
However, they acknowledged the difficulties of maintaining this principle when a club
decided on developing a 36-hole course and wanted other sports activities around the
clubhouse. Designers needed to avoid steep grades, especially at the end of a round, to
prevent golfers from becoming overfatigued. Providing or keeping trees allowed for
windbreaks along fairways, scenic backdrops for greens, visual barriers between parallel
holes, and visual walls to hide ugly surroundings. Landscape design was critical for
creating a sense of entrance to the club’s grounds and to integrate the clubhouse with
surrounding sports facilities and the golf course. The general goal was to blend efficiency
with the picturesque.

Architects developed basic clubhouse plan types. First, the most illustrated type was
the finger plan. Basic functions, such as the lounge and dining rooms, were in a central
building, and building wings typically housed locker rooms, guest bedrooms, and
sometimes an indoor swimming pool. This plan type worked best for large clubs that had
multiple functions. With a large building complex, the building wings enabled the
architect to orient the floor plan to existing land contours and provide a V or U stage set
that looked on the golf course. Second, the corridor plan type connected the major club
functions along a single corridor. This type was most adaptable in small country clubs,
where an architect could easily organize a small number of functions along a corridor
pine that was not excessively long. Another alternative for the small country club was
he great hall plan. The club’s main dining room or lounge served as a central space with
he club’s other functions surrounding it. In a large country club, an architect had
ifficulty placing all the club’s functions around the great hall. Finally, there was the
ourtyard plan. The courtyard served as a pivotal open space around which architects
rganized a club’s functions, but, as in the great hall plan, all a club’s activities could not
Iways be efficiently arranged around a central space. However, these four plan
Iternatives were ideal types, and architects with commissions for large country clubs
lesigned a variety of hybrids, enabling them to incorporate some types best suited for
small country clubs.

Architects emphasized interior design and decor more than they had in the past by
focusing on the need for the clubhouse’s interior to convey a feeling of family, dignity,
and comfort. They paid special attention to the fireplace’s design and placement in the
main room because it was the symbolic center of club social life. The recommended
dining room, lounge, and great hall height was at least a story and a half to give dignity
and importance to the club’s main social spaces. The staircase design was important not
only as a social place centrally located to club activities but also as an integral feature for

ZI

ee.

ae po


particular traditional building styles that conveyed the visual dignity that club members
wanted.

In the 1920s perhaps the main design anomaly in relation to the country
club ideal was the men’s grillroom. Although the country club was
promoted as a family club, men dominated its membership rosters and
club definitions of social terrain. Men particularly enjoyed the grill as a
place to eat and drink after a round of golf, where their dress and language
could be informal. The grillroom had its historic roots in city social clubs
that were exclusively for men, and it was continuing that traditional

exclusivity in the country club.

In the United States architectural styling in country clubs continued to repeat past
practices and regional styles, with some minor variations. The clubs in Florida and
California almost universally adopted Spanish or Italian styles of architecture, whereas
those in New England were influenced by American Colonial, English, Georgian, and
French farmhouse design. Spanish Colonial became a popular style in Florida during its
real estate boom in the 1920s. In the Southwest architects used the Pueblo style, as seen
at the Trinidad Country Club of Trinidad, Colorado. Modernism, however, was largely
missing. In 1924 Frank Lloyd Wright produced schematic drawings for the Nakoma
Country Club of Madison, Wisconsin, but a new, conservative board of governors
rejected his innovative design proposal. Thus, by the 1920s architects had incorporated
all the major styles used for other building types in the United States into clubhouse
design.

In the early postwar era, modernism became the dominant style. By the 1950s
progressive architects had rejected the classical styles for modernism, and this shift is
seen in country club designs of the time. Glass, steel, and concrete were the basic
materials used to express this modernist style. In the 1940s Chicago’s Tam O’Shanter
Club and the Des Moines, Iowa, Golf and Country Club built two of the first clubhouses
that exemplified the International Style. Organic architecture reflected the influence of
Wright, who designed buildings to fit imto the site rather than to dominate it. His
architecture emphasized indigenous building materials, and in the 1950s some architects
were highly influenced by his buildings that used asymmetrical plans and triangular
forms. Completed in 1958, the Paradise Valley Country Club of Scottsdale, Arizona,
exemplified the Wrightian influence. There were clubhouse designs that mixed these two
modernist variations by using the rectilinear formalism and flat roofs of the International
Style while using indigenous materials that gave the appearance of organic architecture.
Regardless of the particular purity or mix of modernist options, newly organized country
clubs chose modernism as it increasingly became the most popular architectural style in
the nation.

Some country clubs that built a modernist style clubhouse later replaced it with a
traditional design. Modernist architecture removed the traditional building cues that
conveyed an elite lifestyle. Club members soon longed for a return to heavy timber and
stone in clubhouse construction. By the 1980s architects returned to using historic styles,
although some clubs in western states still preferred the modernist style. Members of the
Sedge-field Country Club of Greensboro, North Carolina, so adamantly preferred their
Tudor-style clubhouse that they restored it. Some architectural firms revived some of


modernism’s early beginnings. In 1994 Klages, Carter, Vail and Partners designed the
Coto de Caza Country Club of California in a manner that reflected the Arts and Crafts
style of Bernard Maybeck and the Greene brothers. Architects began taking a personal
approach to choosing an architectural style for the country club and its clubhouse. They
visited club members’ homes to determine what style they would find most comfortable
in their club life. Thus, modernism’s popularity fell as country club members sought
building styles that better reflected their tastes and values.

Some changes in plan layouts in the postwar era were directed largely by the
introduction of air conditioning. In the past verandas were often part of a clubhouse plan,
but air conditioning now made these porches obsolete. Attempts to create cross venti
lation or to have high ceilings for better air circulation were no longer needed as long as
an air-conditioning system was installed. By the 1950s automobile ownership was
common, and most roads were paved; there was no longer a need for club members to
remain overnight at the clubhouse. Women were increasingly provided equal treatment
with men and women jointly used the same rooms for socializing. The men’s grillroom
often became simply the grillroom in new country clubs. Women were also taking a more
active role in sports, and larger women’s locker rooms reflected this involvement. Thus,
the country club’s floor plan reflected both technical and social changes throughout the
20th century.

JAMES MAYO
Greene, Henry M. and Charles S. (United States); Maybeck, Bernard R.

(United States)

Further Reading

Gordon, John S., “The American Country Club,” 41 (September 1990)
Mayo, James M., New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1998

CRAFTSMAN STYLE

Reaching the height of its popularity in the first decades of the 20th century, the
Craftsman style in America was informed by both European and Japanese architectural
design. The Craftsman style and the Arts and Crafts movement, of which Craftsman was
a part, hearkened back to medieval times, when the creative labor of human beings rather
than the constant hum of machinery was the driving force behind the built environment
and craft objects. The Craftsman movement would reinvigorate handicraft, return the
skilled artisan to a position of respect, and serve as a reminder that honest labor could be
joyful rather than dehumanizing. In England the Arts and Crafts movement originated
with such thinkers and architects as John Ruskin, William Morris, C.R.Ashbee, and
M.H.Baillie-Scott. On the Continent, Craftsman buildings tended to use more masonry
than wood, to incorporate tiled roofs, and to use half-timbered exterior ornamentation

with Tudor overtones. The American Arts and Crafts movement drew on these influences
while adapting itself to liberal capitalism and the varying climates and landscapes of the
United States. The movement and its design principles were popularized through such
publications as Gustav Stickley’s magazine . In contrast to the Victorian buildings that
preceded them, Craftsman structures eschewed applied ornamentation in favor of the
natural beauty of construction materials and a simplicity of line. Perhaps the greatest
irony of this preference for simplicity and honesty of materials was the reality that much
Craftsman joinery, in both architecture and furniture, was extremely elaborate and
difficult to execute.

The Craftsman style reached its fullest expression mainly in domestic rather than
public buildings. The style was characterized by the use of natural building materials,
such as brick, stone, and regionally available woods. A hallmark of Craftsman design was
the use of exposed joinery on both the exterior and the interior of buildings, an art
arguably brought to its most dra-matic realization in the Blacker House (1907) and
Gamble House (1908), designed by Charles Sumner Greene and Henry Mather Greene in
Pasadena, California. It is in the work of the Greenes that the Japanese influence on the
Craftsman style is most apparent, particularly in the roof supports, lanterns, and reflecting
pool on the rear terrace. In addition to natural building materials and exposed joinery,
Craftsman domestic structures generally featured low-pitched roofs that served to anchor
the buildings to their surrounding landscape. Even the three-story Gamble House appears
relatively low to the ground. In addition the tasteful use of stained and art glass as well as
prominent fireplaces (often incorporating handmade tiles as a decorative element)
surrounded by inglenooks or seating areas were components of the style. The homes
typically (although not universally) worked toward an open plan, minimizing obstacles
between rooms. Craftsman style was also characterized by a belief in comprehensive
design where it was possible. In homes designed for wealthy clients by Frank Lloyd
Wright and the Greene brothers, for example, furniture, lighting fixtures, textiles, and
accessories were all designed as integral parts of the domestic space rather than as
afterthoughts.

In the United States the work of the Greene brothers is perhaps most frequently
associated with the Craftsman style at its best. Indeed, David P.Handlin (1979) has
argued that California was the most active region of the country for Arts and Crafts
design. The Greenes’ “Ultimate Bungalows” in Pasadena and additional projects
throughout the state, such as the Thorsen House (1908) in Berkeley, provide the best-
preserved and most fully articulated examples of the style. Peter Davey describes the
Greenes’ style as one “in which complexity was built up from elements of great
simplicity, an architecture of timber in which beam was piled upon beam, rafter upon
rafter to form ordered nests of smooth sticks with great overhanging eaves and projecting
balconies to provide shade from the sun. Every member and every joint is made explicit”
(1980, 212). Craftsman-style buildings on the West Coast tended to draw on the work of
the Greenes and on Stickley’s designs, incorporating more wood than stone, including
shingles, and ample porches enhanced with rough stones or masonry.

In addition to the Greenes, Frank Lloyd Wright’s Prairie style is recognized as a part
of the Arts and Crafts movement despite the visible differences between Wright’s designs
and those of other Craftsman architects. While the Greenes were busy on the West Coast,
Wright was changing domestic architecture in the Midwest. His own home and studio

(1889) in Oak Park, Illinois, exhibit many of the features described previously, such as
the tasteful use of art glass, prominence of natural woods, and fireplace inglenook.
Further, Wright’s Robie House (1906-09) in Chicago demonstrates the clean horizontal
lines, spectacular woodwork, free-flowing space, and dramatic central fireplace which
were key elements of Wright’s Prairie style. An excellent example of the Craftsman style
applied to a public building is Bernard Maybeck’s First Church of Christ Scientist (1909-
11) in Berkeley. The exposed brackets supporting the low-pitched roof and dramatic
windows exemplify the Craftsman style on a large scale.

With the onset of World War I, the Arts and Crafts movement in America began to
decline in popularity. The ideals that gave rise to the movement were losing their appeal
for many, and the allure of mass-produced housing components made pos sible in part
through the advances of wartime construction became increasingly hard to resist. The
simplicity of the Arts and Crafts movement was gradually replaced by the even more
simplified International Style, with its clean lines and blank facades. Even so, in almost
any town in the country, one can still feel the influence of the Craftsman style and its
domestic architectural ideals.

CYNTHIA DUQUETTE SMITH
Arts and Crafts Movement; Ashbee, C.R. (England); Bungalow; Greene,
Henry M. and Charles S. (United States); House; Mackintosh, Charles
Rennie (Scotland); Maybeck, Bernard R. (United States); Stickley, Gustav

(United States); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading
Davey, Peter, London: The Architectural Press, 1980
Handlin, David P. Boston: Little, Brown, 1979
Kardon, Janet (editor), New York: Abrams, 1993
Lancaster, Clay, | New York: Abbeville, 1985
Makinson, Randall L., Salt Lake City, Utah: Peregrine Smith, 1977
McCoy, Esther, | New York: Praeger, 1975
Stickley, Gustav, New York: Dover, 1979
Trapp, Kenneth R., Leslie Green Bowman, et al., New York: Abbeville, 1993

CRAM, RALPH ADAMS 1863-1942

Architect, United States

Ralph Adams Cram was without question the foremost practitioner of the Gothic style
of architecture of his day in the United States, but he was a writer and advocate of no less
energy and stature. The author of 24 books and scores of magazine and journal articles,
Cram was a member of the faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from

1914 to 1922, and he toiled ceaselessly to advance his reasons for the continuation of an
architectural tradition stretching back to medieval times.

Born in Hampton Falls, New Hampshire, Cram lacked the money to attend college and
instead became an apprentice in the Boston architectural firm of Rotch and Tilden.
Through his expanding circle of acquaintances in the Boston artistic world, Cram fell
under the influence of the work of the English designer-writers John Ruskin and William
Morris and came to admire the work of Henry Vaughan, an English Gothicist (and
follower of George F.Bodley) who would go on to design the National Cathedral in
Washington, D.C.

Cram was a devotee of high-church Anglicanism, a belief that made his enthusiasm
for the Gothic more than merely stylistic. Indeed, art and religion to Cram were virtually
inseparable. In his view the Gothic was not a style of the past but rather one that was
capable of continuing evolution and that embodied the highest spiritual aspirations. “My
idea,” he wrote in his 1936 autobiography, “was that we should set ourselves to pick up
the threads of the broken tradition and stand strongly for Gothic as a style for church
building that was not dead but only moribund and perfectly susceptible of an awakening
to life again.”

So vigorously did Cram pursue the Gothic that he has come to be thought of almost
exclusively as a Gothic architect, but he was also highly skilled in the classical,
Byzantine, Georgian, and Lombard styles.

Over his long career, Cram worked with numerous collaborators, but his most fruitful
association was with Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue, who joined him in 1891 and soon
became a partner in the firm. Cram’s greatest strength was in the development of the plan
and the overall composition of a building, whereas Goodhue proved a master at detail.
Among the many brilliant ecclesiastical buildings that they designed together, the finest
example of their combined talents is St. Thomas Episcopal Church on New York City’s
Fifth Avenue, completed in 1914. A serenely confident sense of mass and space is
enlivened with striking ornamentation, especially in the enormous reredos, or sculptural
screen, behind the altar. Designed by Goodhue and executed by the sculptor Lee Lawrie,
it creates an almost theatrical focus for the earnest overall composition.

Despite the unabashed historicism of St. Thomas, Montgomery Schuyler, the
distinguished architecture critic, saw the beginnings of a new architectural direction
lurking beneath its details. “In the block,” Schuyler wrote, “without a single tool mark of
ornament, the new St. Thomas’s would already be a noble building. The highest praise
the decoration of such a building can deserve is that it heightens and develops the
inherent expression of the structure.”

Cram’s far grander but less elegant design for the completion of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (begun by the firm of Heins and La Farge), also in New York, marks the
high point of the Gothic revival in the United States.

Much of Cram’s finest work was done at private boarding schools, such as Phillips
Exeter Academy, and on college and university campuses. He was a consulting architect
to Bryn Mawr, Mount Holyoke, and Wellesley and did work at Rice, Sweetbriar, and
Williams, but he is best known in this area as the supervising architect of the Princeton
University campus, where his most powerful buildings include the chapel and the
graduate school (1911-29). In explaining his dedication to the Gothic as the most
appropriate style for educational institutions, Cram wrote that the late Gothic of the


colleges at Oxford and Cambridge was “the only style that absolutely expresses [the]
ideals of an education that makes for culture and...character.”

With his partners Bertram Goodhue and Frank Ferguson (who was
responsible primarily for engineering), Cram also oversaw the design of
several major buildings at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, most
notably the Cadet Chapel (1903-

HAiteag

{t

Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New
Hampshire (1932)
© Arne Hodalic/CORBIS

14). The architects exploited the dramatic site above the Hudson River to the full. The
concept of a Gothic fortress rising from the heights commanding a great river seemed
both programmatically and symbolically correct. No better icon of Cram’s integration of
his spiritual and architectural muscularity exists than that above the main door, which is
embellished with a cross in the form of a sword hilt.

The image of the sword was one that Cram used later in life, as the influence of Le
Corbusier and the other leading European modernists began to be felt in the United
States, much to Cram’s dismay. “These things,” he wrote, referring to the stripped
elements of the new aesthetic, “seem to me to be a betrayal of trust, a vicious though
unintentional assault on the basic principles of a sane and wholesome society.” The
modernist idea, he went on, “has its own place and it may and should go to it. Its
boundaries are definite and fixed, and beyond them it cannot go, for the Angel of
Decency, Propriety, and Reason stands there with a flaming sword.”

CARTER WISEMAN

CRANBROOK, MICHIGAN

Twenty miles northwest of Detroit in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, Cranbrook is an
educational complex comprising a house and garden, a church, three schools, an art
academy, and a science institute. It was developed by George Gough Booth (1864-1949),
publisher of the and a chain of smaller papers, and his wife, Ellen Warren Scripps
Booth (1863-1948), daughter of newspaper magnate James Edmund Scripps.

In 1904 the Booths purchased a large farm in Bloomfield Township and named it for
the ancestral home of Booth’s father in Cranbrook, County of Kent, England. Aided by
Booth’s sketches, Albert Kahn (1869-1942) prepared plans for their English Arts and
Crafts country house (1908) overlooking the estate. The Booths commissioned American
and European artisans and craftsmen to create tapestries, wood carvings, furniture,
metalwork, glasswork, fine bookbindings, and other decorative pieces in an arts-and-
crafts aesthetic for the house. The Booths subsequently began transforming their estate
into an educational complex distinguished for its architecture, gardens, fountains, pools,
and sculpture.

Booth articulated the vision for Cranbrook, assembled advisers, collaborated with
architects, artists, and craftsmen to form and furnish it, and, together with his wife,
provided the financial means to execute it. Finnish-American architect Eliel Saarinen
(1873-1950) designed many of the campus’s plans and buildings between 1925 and
1942.

The first community gathering place, the Meeting House (1918), was built to the
English cottage designs of Booth and his son, Henry Scripps Booth, then a student of
architecture at the University of Michigan. Its rambling additions and tower adapted the
glacial fieldstone, brick, and half-timber building for use as the Brookside School for
Young Children (1922—1930s).

The Booths commissioned Oscar H.Murray (1883-1957) of Bertram Grosvenor
Goodhue and Associates to design the late Gothic Revival Christ Church (1929) as the
spiritual cornerstone for Cranbrook and the Bloomfield Hills community. Leading
contemporary Arts and Crafts artisans and craftsmen created superb ornamental detail
and furnishings for the stone church.

In 1925 Saarinen, a visiting professor of architecture at the University of Michigan in
Ann Arbor, accepted Booth’s invitation to develop a visionary plan for an art academy at
Cranbrook. Having won second prize in the Chicago Tribune Tower competition of 1922,
Saarinen had come to Chicago with his family to see the American Midwest.

Saarinen’s first completed work in America was the Cranbrook School for Boys
(1929). His plans, based on the sketches of Henry Scripps Booth and his university
classmate, J.Robert F.Swanson, after George Gough Booth’s preliminary designs,
presented a campus of remodeled farm buildings (1911). Remodeling proved too costly,
so Saarinen revised the plan, retaining much of the arrangement of the farm buildings.
The exquisitely crafted brick buildings topped with red tile-clad gabled roofs are grouped
around a quadrangle, courts, and terraces in the manner of English collegiate
quadrangles. For the school Saarinen won the Gold Medal Award of the Architectural
League of New York for 1934.

Booth attributed the origins of Cranbrook Academy of Art, a working place for
creative art expressive of the time, to his visit to the American Academy in Rome in
1922. Utilitarian brick buildings with studios and living quarters (1928—1930s) flank
Academy Way with courts and plazas facing gardens to the east. The propylaeum of the
modern monumental art museum and library (1942) forms the focus for the formal
gardens, pools, fountains, and sculpture. The precursor to the art academy was the group
of European artists and craftsmen—including Swedish sculptor Carl Milles, Finnish
ceramicist Maija Grottel, and others—who assembled at Cranbrook to enhance the
buildings and grounds of the institutions.

The Kingswood School for Girls (1931) comprises two connected rectangular wings
that form quadrangles with a succession of long, low projecting wings. The low-pitched,
copper-clad hipped roof with broad overhanging eaves; the horizontal bands of windows;
the spreading out of the brick building toward the periphery of the dramatic site on
Kingswood Lake from the higher condensed center; and the open interior spaces are
reminiscent of the Prairie architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright. The Saarinen family
collaborated in unifying the buildings, interiors, and furnishings. Loja Saarinen created
curtains, upholstery, and rugs; Eero Saarinen designed furniture and lead-glass windows;
and Eva Lisa (Pipsan) Saarinen Swanson did the interior decoration for the dining room,
auditorium, and other spaces.

At the Cranbrook Institute of Science, Saarinen expanded the temporary cinder-block
building with an observatory (1931) designed by George Gough Booth with a simplified
modern flat-roofed brick structure (1938) that was reflected in a pool animated with
sculptures by Milles.

The Booths established the Cranbrook Foundation in 1927 to endow and support the
institutional development of Cranbrook. In 1973 the Cranbrook Foundation and five of
the original six Cranbrook institutions reorganized as the Cranbrook Educationa
Community. The sale of Cranbrook’s ownership in Booth Newspapers in the 1970s and
in the Evening News Association in 1986 and other financial strategies realized funds
needed to support massive restoration and construction work to mark its centennial in
2004. This master plan is setting the course for the future, enabling the community to
meet the changing needs of education, a diverse student body, and a more public role.

The result is a northern access to the campus off Woodward Avenue, the main
thoroughfare from Detroit to northern communities; four extraordinary new buildings and
additions to existing buildings that are compatible with the Saarinen and Booth campus;
and the restoration of the historic buildings, art, and landscaping. The new wing of early
childhood, science, and music rooms at the Brookside School (1997) by Peter Rose
responds to the small size and scale, irregularity, and childlike qualities of the historic
buildings. The natatorium (1999) at the Cranbrook School by Tod Williams and Billie
Tsien opens to nature by means of retractable oculi and hydraulically powered louvered
wall panels. The spacious studio addition to the museum (2001) by Rafael Moneo has
gallery, studio, and fabrication spaces that permit the creation of large artworks. The new
wing to the science institute (1998) by Steven Holl, entered through a spectacular light
laboratory, straddles the wings of Saarinen’s older building to connect with and form an
interior courtyard with the older building. Thus, Cranbrook continues stewardship of its
National Historic Landmark campus while making concrete its visionary role.

KATHRYN BISHOP ECKERT


Arts and Crafts Movement; Campus Planning; Goodhue, Bertram
Grosvenor (United States); Moneo, Rafael (Spain); Saarinen, Eero
(Finland); Saarinen, Eliel (Finland); School; Williams, Tod, and Billie
Tsien (United States); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

Balmori, Diane, “Cranbrook: The Invisible Landscape,” 53/1 (March 1994)
Benson, Robert, “The Cranbrook Community Examines Its Future,” 5
(September/October 1987)

Christ-Janer, Albert, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948; revised edition, 1979

Clark, Robert Judson, et al., New York: Abrams, 1983
Eckert, Kathryn Bishop, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2001
McMechan, Jervis Bell, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan: Christ Church
Cranbrook, 1979
Pound, Arthur, Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State University Press, 1964
White, Lee A., et al., Bloomfield Hills, Michigan: Cranbrook Institute of
Science, 1959
Wittkopp, Gregory (editor), New York: Abrams, 1995

CRET, PAUL PHILIPPE 1876-1945

Architect, United States

Paul Cret can be seen as one of the leading examples of the architectural generation
that formed the bridge between neoclassicism and modernism.

Whereas many American architects, starting with Richard Morris Hunt, traveled to
France to study at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Cret was a native. Born in Lyons in 1876, he
studied at the Ecole from 1897 to 1903, absorbing its principles of rationality and
symmetry and its devotion to the sources of classicism. Although he distinguished
himself in his studies and might have flourished professionally in France, in 1903 Cret
accepted a position on the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
While there, he helped establish the university’s school “of architecture as one of the
most influential in the United States, counting among his students Louis I.Kahn, who
would go on to prominence in later life.

In his own practice, Cret concentrated heavily on civic buildings, to which he brought
a steadily more refined style of Beaux-Arts classicism. Describing his professional goals
in the early 1930s, he wrote, “The characteristic of this practice is the planning of
important city improvements, the planning of government...buildings and important
memorial buildings.” However, the aim of his aesthetic was to convey, as Elizabeth
Grossman has written in her 1996 monograph, an “intimate monumentality.”

Cret eagerly adopted new construction techniques, particularly in the use of steel
framing, but he remained committed to the essentially Beaux-Arts idea that the
architecture of a building should flow from an analysis of its program. He was averse to
the idea that a building should make a personal statement about its creator.

Cret’s earliest major commission was won in a competition he entered in association
with Albert Kelsey for the International Bureau of American Republics, later called the
Pan American Union, in Washington, D.C., completed in 1910. The building was richly
ornamented, but beneath the trim lay a rigorous organization of masses and spaces that
gave it a fundamental sculptural power.

Cret interrupted his career to return to his homeland and serve with the French army
during World War I. (He was first an infantryman and later an interpreter on the staff of
American General John Pershing, commander of the American Expeditionary Force; the
frontline experience left him partially deaf.) On his return to the United States, Cret
embarked on a gradual simplification of the ornamental palette that he had employed on
the Pan American Union building, reducing columns to flat piers, stripping them of
capitals and bases, and eliminating moldings.

This austere aesthetic, powerfully exemplified by the Hartford County Building (1930)
in Connecticut and the Folger Shakespeare Library (1932) in Washington, D.C., proved
especially effective for the many memorials that Cret designed for the dead of World War
I both in France and in such American cities as Providence, Rhode Island. However, his
reach extended well beyond these high-minded structures to include such mundane
projects as the Central Heating Plant for Washington, D.C.

Although some have argued that Cret’s “stripped classicism’”—which he
preferred to call “new classicism’—reflected a return to conservative
sources in reaction to the upheavals of World War I, a more convincing
argument can be made that Cret was seeking a version of a style in whose
fundamental principles he still believed but whose embellishment had
become overly familiar and socially suspect. He suffered among other
critics for the superficial similarities of his work to that of contemporary
architects in Italy and Germany, whose less sensitive

Folger Shakespeare Library, East

Capitol Street facade

Photo

© Mary Ann Sullivan


Folger Shakespeare Library, Art Deco
detail

Photo © Mary Ann Sullivan

forms and spaces created in the service of authoritarian regimes were given a political
overtone of racial “purity.”

Cret retired from the University of Pennsylvania faculty in 1937 and a year later was
awarded the Gold Medal by the American Institute of Architects. In his acceptance
speech, Cret said, “In the art of Architecture, collective effort counts more than individual
industry in giving form to the ideals of a period.”

Cret died on 8 September 1945 during an inspection tour of a building site in North
Carolina. His vision of a “new classicism” had long since been overtaken by modernism,
but with the discrediting of that movement later in the century, Cret’s evolved
investigations of traditional forms began to take on renewed stature, especially as durable
architectural citizens of the American urban fabric.

CARTER WISEMAN

Biography

Born in Lyons, France, 21 October 1876; immigrated to the United States 1903;
naturalized 1927. Studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Lyons; attended the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts, Paris 1897-1903. Private practice 1907; collaborated with the firm of
Zantzinger, Borie, and Medary. Served in World War I. Member, planning commission,
Chicago’s Century of Progress Exposition of 1933 1928. Professor of design, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 1903-37; pupils included Louis I. Kahn. Critic,
Philadelphia T-Square Club; critic, Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts. Gold Medal,
American Institute of Architects 1938. Died 8 September 1945.

Selected Works

International Bureau of the American Republics (now Organization of American States;
with Albert Kelsey), Washington, D.C., 1910
Indianapolis Public Library (with Zantzinger, Borie, and Medary), 1927
Detroit Institute of Arts (with Zantzinger, Borie, and Medary), 1927
Providence War Memorial, Rhode Island, 1929
Hartford County Building (with Smith and Bassette), Connecticut, 1930
Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, D.C., 1932
Aisne-Marne Memorial, near Chateau-Thierry, France, 1933
Flanders Field Chapel, Wareghem, Belgium, 1933
Federal Reserve Bank, Philadelphia, 1934
Federal Reserve Board Building, Washington, D.C., 1937

Naval Memorial, Gibraltar, Spain, 1937

Selected Publications

“The Ecole des Beaux-Arts: What Its Architectural Teaching Means,” 23 (1908)
“Modem Architecture,” in 1923

Further Reading

Burchard, John, and Albert Bush-Brown, Boston: Little, Brown, 1961; revised

edition, 1966
Grossman, Elizabeth Greenwell, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1996
Handlin, David P., | London: Thames and Hudson, 1985
Kidney, Walter C., New York: Braziller, 1974
Whiffen, Marcus, and Frederick Keeper, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press,
1981
White, Theophilus B., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Art Alliance Press, 1973
Wiseman, Carter, New York: Norton, 1998

CUADRA SAN CRISTOBAL

Designed by Luis Barragan, completed 1968
Mexico City, Mexico

The Mexican Pritzker laureate Luis Barragan (1902-88) designed Cuadra
San Cristébal in collaboration with his protégé Andrés Casillas in 1967—
68. The Cuadra San Cristobal, along with the design of his own house and
the Chapel of Capuchinas Sacramentarias, are premier examples of
Mexican contemporary architecture. His house, built in 1947, undoubtedly
demonstrates a period of maturity in Barragan’s career, and the Chapel of
Capuchinas Sacramentarias (1952-55) is a masterpiece in its exploration
of light, demonstrating great refinement and sophistication. These three
works together represent the pinnacle of “emotional architecture,”
conveying nostalgia and spirituality as defined by Barragan’s Creole
heritage.

Luis Barragan (in collaborat
Andrés Casillas de Alba), Cuadra San
Cristobal, Los Clubes, Mexico City,

1966-68

ion with

Photo Armando Salas Portugal ©

Barragan Foundation,
Switzerland/Artists Rights S
New York

ociety,

Born in Guadalajara, Mexico, Barragan spent his childhood in the now nonextant family

hacienda of Los Corrales in La Sierra del Tigre. He acquired

a taste for the vernacular in

the small towns of Jalisco and developed his innate sensibility of light, color, texture, and

to a greater extent, myth, silence, solitude, and serenity.
Cuadra San Cristébal was one of Barragan’s most compre
works. His designs were heavily influenced by conversat

hensive and complex mature
tions with his friends (the

humanist Ignacio Diaz Morales and the artist Jestis Reyes Ferreira) and the written works

(poetry and essays) of Marcel Proust, Charles Baudelaire, and

Barragan sought out metaphysics, surrealism, ethics, and

conventional texts of his discipline for inspiration. (The

Valle Inclan.
psychology rather than the
Enchanted Gardens) and

(The Dovecotes), written and illustrated by the French landscape architect Ferdinand Bac
(1859-1952), as well as Cyril Connolly’s influenced Barragan’s first houses.
J.M.Buendia explains how (published in 1925), with colorful illustrations by
Choukhaeff, influenced Barragan to use color combinations from this book in some of his

works.

As a concluding phase of the Cuadra San Cristébal project, Barragan developed the

public park Las Arboledas in 1958. He designed a comprehe

nsive program of entrances,

plazas, the great red wall, and the fountains El Bebedero and

El Campanario (The Spout

and The Belfry, 1959). Barragan intended Las Arboledas to become a horse lovers’
paradise. However, the development became a popular destination for middle-class
suburbanites. In 1963 Barragan, himself an accomplished equestrian, purchased a series
of plots within Las Arboledas that he called Los Clubes. He planned this development as
an exclusive and private equestrian experience, catering specifically to the elite. The
Fuente de los Amantes (The Lovers’ Fountain, 1964), Cuadra San Cristébal, and the
home of the Egestrome family reflect a powerful refinement of Barragan’s
phenomenological explorations of exterior space. The sounds of water emerging from
scuppers and horses’ hooves in contact with the stone paving evoke sounds of the streets
of Mazamitla, demonstrating a physical and psychological connection to memory. The
fragmentation of space through the use of enormous walls that are often punctured and
juxtaposed to visually frame the landscape and the reflective surfaces of pools of water
enrich what is a surrealist space with metaphysical contradictions. Barragan’s
architecture relies less on theoretical principles and rational formulas than on emotional
and subjective experiences.

Barragan presented the design for Cuadra San Cristobal as a gift to the Egestrome
family under the condition that a large plot of land would be purchased for the project.
Andrés Casillas explains that before the design, he and Barragan visited several small
towns and haciendas in the state of Mexico. These visits evoked images of the project
that were then developed through models and perspective sketches. The first model of the
complex was exactly what was to be constructed later, excluding the enormous pink wal
with two slotlike cuts for vertical ventilation that required approximately 70 sketches
before the final proposal. According to Casillas, Barragan designed by dividing the
project into isolated moments, individually created and later integrated into the whole.
For Barragan there was no bad proposal: all proposals had considerable potential. He
would often make changes in a project during its construction. In San Cristobal he would
tie lengths of cloth to wooden poles to mock up the position of a wall, as was the case
with the with wall that defines the entrance to the complex. Barragan would also mount
colored paper over the unfinished white walls to see whether the deep pinks, maroons,
and purples would blend with the light and mood of the environment. Almost always
immersed in a creative act of emotion and intuition, his process was devoid of rationa.
thinking.

JAVIER GOMEZ ALVAREZ-TOSTADO
Barragan, Luis (Mexico); Mexico; Mexico City, Mexico; University
Library, UNAM, Mexico City

Further Reading

Ambasz, Emilio, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1976
23 (1994) (special edition entitled “In the World of Luis Barragan”)
Burian, Edward R. (editor), Austin: University of Texas Press, 1997
Buendia Julbez, José Maria, Juan Palomar, and Guillermo Eguiarte, Mexico City:
Reverte Ediciones, 1996; as translated by Margaret E.Brooks, New York: Rizzoli,
1997

Riggen Martinez, Antonio, Milan: Electa, 1996; as translated by Christina
Bennett, New York: Monacelli Press, 1996
San Martin, Ignacio (editor), Tempe: Arizona State University Center for Latin
American Studies Press, 1997

CUBA

Even for the most jaded architect, Cuba represents one of the most fascinating and
beautiful places in the world. Today Cuba has become a “must see” destination for
architects. Although some American architects have been granted permission to visit the
country by the U.S. government, most have traveled illegally, risking large fines and
possible prison sentences to visit what some call the “Paris of the West.” Cuba has one of
the largest intact collections of historic buildings of any country in the world (going as far
back as 500 years), including one of the largest intact collections of Spanish colonia
architecture and the largest collection of Soviet-era prefabricated buildings.

Cuba’s architectural prominence dates back to the origin of the New World.
Comparisons and contrasts between the historical architectural brilliance and its current
state of decay offer captivating images and insights into Cuban history, development, and
design.

Cuba provides a wide range of architectural styles, which some call the most beautiful
in the world—pre-Columbian, Spanish colonial, Art Deco, International, Soviet,
Postmodern, and Retro-Cubano. UNESCO has declared Trinidad and Old Havana world
heritage sites. Moreover, the National Arts School and Las Terrazas have also been
declared architectural masterpieces by UNESCO and others.

Located only 90 miles from the United States, Cuba is one of the few truly socialist
countries left in the world. Socialist Cuba has created a radically different economic,
social, and cultural life for its citizens. Architecture is intended to serve the masses’ needs
of efficient and affordable housing, schools, hospitals, offices, and industrial production
space. Ornamentation, excess, and waste are all frowned upon. The irony of Castro’s
socialist revolution was that the imperialist architecture of Spanish colonialism was
replaced with imperialist Soviet International Style. Efforts to create a unique and
original Cubano style free from other styles have largely been a failure.

One of the great myths and disappointments is that Havana has a large collection of
Art Deco and Art Nouveau buildings. Some exist, but only a few are notable and
deserving of attention, such as the 1930 Bacardi building designed by Esteban Rodriguez
Castells, Rafael Fernandez Ruenes, and José Menéndez and the Lopez Serrano apartment
building built in 1932 by Ricardo Mira and Miguel Rosich. The 1947 Collegio de
Arquitectos by Fernando de Zarraga and Mario Esquiroz is another example.

Spanish colonial revival style has a major presence in Cuba. Coming from this
tradition is the widely praised Hotel Nacional, which was completed in 1930 by the
highly respected New York architectural firm of McKim, Mead and White. Another
successful building is the Havana train station by architect Kenneth H.Murchison.


Modern architecture before the revolution produced the widely praised Solymar
apartments built in 1944 in Central Havana by Manuel Copado. These apartments
celebrate the sea with wide circular balconies that represent ocean waves. This building,
and the Tropicana Cabaret designed in 1951-56 by Max Borges Recio, are representative
of the sensual and curvy Modern architecture. Borges also designed the Nautical Club in
1953 in the Playa area of Havana. This building celebrated the sea and shipping industry
by tying together two distinct structures. One symbolizes a large container ship sailing in
the other, the Nautical Club, representing the curvy ocean waves. Another spectacular
presocialist building with nautical leanings is the house of Maria Melero (built between
1940 and 1942 by architect Herminio Laduerman) in the Playa area of Havana. The
building has portholes for windows and features the command bridge of a ship. Many
believe this distinctive architecture reflects Cuban culture and its relationship to the sea,
sensuality, sun, and salsa.

Before and after Cuba’s socialist revolution there was a burst of Modern

and monumental architecture. The Modern architec-

Santiago Hotel, José Antonio Choy
(1991)

© Roberto Segre

ture movement was controversial because these buildings were not adapted to Havana’s
patterns of extreme hot weather—rooms became hotter because the ceilings were lower,
windows were fewer, and heat could not escape to higher floors. Moreover, the
individualism of the Spanish colonial or even Art Deco was lost to a repetitive sharp
angular design. Architect Richard Neutra was a major influence on this movement. Few
are aware that Neutra helped design two buildings in Cuba, one of which (house of
Alfred de Schultess, 1956) won the National College of Architects’ Gold Medal Prize and
has been called the most beautiful house designed by a non-Cuban architectural firm. The
best representation of this Modern architecture was captured by the architect Miguel
Gaston’s house, built in 1952. This house is spectacular because the pool gives the
illusion of floating into Havana Bay and becoming one with it. Nearby, the Riviera Hotel
by Polevitzky, Johnson and Associates, built in 1957, is notable for providing balconies
for every room. The building curves nicely, like a wave, in a seaside teal color. It is very
sleek and sensual; this building also tips its hat to the influence of Morris Lapidus’s
Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami Beach.

Cultural and political ideology is difficult to separate from Cuban architecture. Shortly
after Wallace K.Harrison and Max Abramovitz designed the United Nations Building in
New York, they designed the United States Embassy in 1953, which fits awkwardly
among the historic buildings of Havana’s Malecon. This building was widely criticized
by Cuban architects because of its excessive glass and windows that did not open,
creating a cooling problem. Unlike the grace and substance of the United Nations
Building, this building looks like a typical suburban American office center building,
whose dark frame, glass walls, and 20-foot-high metal fences become the embodiment of
how the socialist government wants its citizens to see America: big, dominating,
impersonal, ugly, and uncaring. This building has become a frequent site of anti-
American demonstrations.

Cuba also uses its large public squares for public rallies. José Marti is honored in
Havana’s Plaza de la Revolucién, a collective effort built between 1938 and 1952. In
Santa Clara a stark square honors Che Guevara, and in Santiago another commemorates
revolutionary leader Antonio Maceo. If the goal of monumentalism is to make the person
feel small and powerless against the state, these squares and others like it seem to be
effective in achieving this goal.

Churches are largely Spanish colonial in design with the exception of the modernist
Jewish temples. Interestingly, the most striking church in Cuba, built in 1927, is a
Spanish revival called El Cobre near Santiago. Of particular significance is the church’s
spectacular placement, rising out of the trees at the bottom of a mountain range.

Perhaps the most important 20th-century watershed architectural event was the
building of the National Art Schools (begun in 1961; never completed). The lead
architect was Ricardo Porro, who sought to celebrate Cuba’s African roots in a
conglomeration of buildings with separate schools for visual arts, music, and dramatic
arts. Construction was stopped and abandoned because of ideology. Critics argued that it
was wasteful and inefficient to spend many hours training brick craftsmen to build highly
sophisticated Catalonian vaults instead of using reinforced-steel concrete. The Soviet-
aligned architects not only defeated the National Arts School, but they also were able to
get Castro to pass a law requiring that all new building projects use mass industrial
production techniques similar to those employed in the Soviet Union. This was the


demise of architecture in socialist Cuba. Architectural styles, historically imported from
Spain and Italy and later France, England, and America, found a new exporter of
architecture in the Soviet Union, which produced faceless, cold, mass-production
concrete housing free of individualization. Housing became a symbol of the state and no
longer a symbol of the self. The vast majority of architects and planners, attacked as part
of the bourgeois class, left Cuba after the revolution because they felt that they had lost a
great deal of professional and personal freedom. Cuba now allows families who receive
dollars from the tourist industry or from relatives overseas to build prefab, low-rise
single-family concrete housing units and allows builders to personalize them with stone,
seashells, wood, and different color paints. The best example of what is called “micro
brigade housing” was built in the early 1990s near the Santiago Bay luxury boat harbor.

Housing and places of work were designed to maximize production of space. Playful,
individualistic, and human-scale housing production became almost nonexistent during
the socialist era. In the conference on Fifty Years of Cuban Architecture, architects
passed resolutions and demanded greater influence in how buildings are to be designed,
ideally to reflect Cuban culture. The National Union of Architects and Engineers has also
denounced the hotel and shopping mall designs of European and Canadian corporations,
the designs of which represent a “cookie-cutter” approach, failing to integrate Cuban
cultural amenities and aesthetics—balconies, more rounded buildings, stained glass, tile
floors instead of carpeting, louvered doors, fanlights above doorways, and louvered
window shutters that open. Most of these new hotels seem like second-rate versions of
Hyatt hotels in third-rate cities.

When the Soviet International school defeated the Cubano National Arts School, Cuba
decreed that all future architecture must follow the Soviet model of rational, scientific,
and efficient design. The Soviet school was greatly influenced by the work of Le
Corbusier. All schools, residences, hospitals, and offices were to be built using
laborsaving devices based on the factory model—no more inefficient design. It is
difficult to quantify a reliable number of how many prefabricated housing units were
built in Cuba, but the estimate is approximately one million. The Cubans insist that
everyone is guaranteed a house, food, education, and transportation, yet many dislike the
houses for their lack of character and personality. The Cuban lament is that you need a
house number to find your own place. Over 100,000 units were lost due to lack of upkeep
during the socialist period. Many blame this on Cuban housing law, which did not factor
in maintenance and repair of roofing, walls, and plumbing. The average Cuban pays
about $2 per month for an apartment.

One development that Castro boasted would be a model socialist city and the envy of
the world is Alamar. More than 100,000 units were constructed there. Today, this
formalistic, factory-built concrete design is roundly considered a major architecture and
planning failure. Even Cuban architects call it a dormitory devoid of services, shops,
style, and exuberance. Much of it stands abandoned and incomplete. Instead of building
in the cities, Castro wanted new housing developments to be outside the city. For Alamar
residents the average commute time is three hours per day back and forth to available
work in Havana. It is a good example of “socialist sprawl.” These buildings do
demonstrate Cuban ingenuity for using unorthodox materials such as wall partitions made
out of processed sugarcane waste. Perhaps the most successful building design is CUJAE,
which is the flagship Cuban university for planning, architecture, and engineering.

CUJAE was a collective effort built in the early 1970s by untrained builders. This
building is located near Havana International Airport about 30 minutes from downtown
Havana. A more interesting and successful result is achieved when old and new are fused
together. Las Ruinas Restaurant in Lenin Park, also near the airport, was built atop the
ruins of a stone church by architect Joaquin Galvan in 1971. Here he recaptures the
Cuban Spanish colonial style of blurring what is inside and outside.

Near Alamar is the Pan-American Village, which makes the best use of prefabricated
materials by putting Cuban accents on the design: more curves, a main promenade like
Havana’s famous Paseo del Prado, shops on the ground floor, homes on the second to
fifth floors, design that incorporates brick, and an individualistic style and a skyline that
is not uniform. The design team was headed by Roberto Caballero and building was
completed in 1991. The Pan-American complex is somewhat successful because it adapts
Soviet prefab buildings into a modern version of Spanish colonial design. The only
problem is that this should have been built in Havana, close to jobs.

Postmodern Architecture

In 1991 José Antonio Choy was the lead architect who put together two of Cuba’s most
important pieces of Postmodern architecture: the Santiago train station and Santiago
Hotel. Choy does not get much credit in Cuban architecture books because few architects
make the 14-hour drive from Havana to eastern Cuba. Choy’s work is similar in many
ways to Frank Gehry’s in its use of unusual building materials, sharp and bold angles,
and nonfunctional, playful, and provocative spaces. Corrugated metal is prominent. For
Cuba these buildings represent a bold departure from the highly rationalized Soviet style
of modular design that is faceless, cold, predictable, uninspiring, and demoralizing. Yet
Cuban citizens see this building as extravagant, inefficient, and wasteful. Both these
buildings are far more political and powerful because of their symbolism. Hotel Santiago
salutes the mighty sugar mills of the past with a Postmodern design. It is important
because it stands against the faceless rationalization of communism by saying the world
is illogical, confusing, and confounding. It says that beauty cannot be found in a simple
straight line but in a curved line that sometimes goes nowhere. The Santiago train station
is even more radical and utilizes stairs climbing up three flights to nowhere, a bridge that
is without function, large pillars that support nothing, and large square blocks tossed
randomly on the front entrance. The Gehry corrugated metal and storm fences are here,
too. More interesting is that this building was built at a time when Russians were cutting
financial support for Cuba. The train building is a powerful commentary on socialist
Cuba—broken, unfinished, and illogical.

The biosphere of Las Terrazas is a one-hour drive west of Havana in Pinar del Rio.
Las Terrazas has undergone a significant reforestation program that utilizes community
gardens, recycling, papermaking, and trees that grow through the buildings. UNESCO
has declared this a world biosphere. Castro has declared that the future is in ecotourism.
The Hotel Moka was designed by Mario Girona in the early 1990s as a green building in
which trees are allowed to grow through rooms, hallways, and decks. The red tile used
here is another salute to the Spanish colonial era.

Prado Neptuno is representative of the movement for Retro-Cubano, which was built
in 1999 by Roberto Gottardi, one of the architects who helped design the National Arts
School. It is a Cuban salute to Frank Lloyd Wright, combining mosaic tiles, architectural


lighting effects, and an emphasis on local materials. This building has been widely
praised as a new chapter in Cuban architecture.

Callejon de Hamel, located in Central Havana, is an inspiring example of how to
revitalize an inner-city neighborhood through art that reflects the history, hopes, and
desires of its people.

The movement is led by a painter known as Salvador, who was untrained
and has taught other nonpainters to create murals that celebrate A frican-
based religion, urban life, love, and sex. The murals that cover six-story
housing blocks are incredible in their ability to turn a bleak neighborhood
into one that is colorful, exciting, and inspiring for both residents and
tourists. This is one of the few places where large murals are allowed to
exist free of the usual prosocialist political propaganda.

Socialism meant the end of architecture in Cuba. Very little has been written on Cuban
architecture under socialism. Only a handful of reliable and useful books exist on the
topic in English or Spanish. Two of the best books were written by Americans: by
Rachel Carley and by John A.Loomis. The very best Cuban writer on architecture is
Eduardo Luis Rodriguez, whose chief role is to document significant pieces of
architecture for restoration and preservation. Although highly regarded internationally,
Rodriguez has been reluctant to write critical articles on architecture under socialism.
Interestingly, his most recent book on Modern architecture in Havana, published by
Princeton University Press, stops in 1965—skipping 36 years of socialist architecture,
which is probably of greater interest than many of the derivative buildings he reviews.
Until recently, foreign travel to Cuba, especially outside Havana, has been difficult. If
foreigners do publish articles critical of Cuban socialist architecture, they face a possible
ban on future travel to Cuba. More scholarship is needed that documents, analyzes,
reviews, and evaluates Cuban architecture, especially during the socialist period.

JOHN I.GILDERBLOOM

Further Reading

Carley, Rachel, New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1997
Codrescu, Andrei, New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1999
Ellena, Maria, Martin Zequieira, and Eduardo Luis Rodriguez Fernandez, Havana:
Agencia Espafiola de Cooperacion Internacional, and Seville, Spain: Junta de Andalucia,
Consejeria de Obras Publicas y Transportes, 1993
22 (2002) (special issue on Cuba)

Loomis, John A., New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999
Miller, John, and Susannah Clark (editors), San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1996
Rodriguez, Eduardo Luis, translated by Lorna Scott Fox, New York: Princeton

Architectural Press, 2000

Segre, Roberto, Mario Coyula, and Joseph L.Scarpaci, New York and Chichester,
West Sussex: Wiley, 1997

Stanley, David, Hawthorne, Victoria, and Oakland, California: Lonely Planet, 1996

CUBISM

The aesthetic movements of the early 20th century were frequently and closely connected
with new ideas in architecture. Futurism, the Dutch group De Stijl, the purist manifesto of
Le Corbusier and Ozenfant, Suprematism and Constructivism in Russia, and
Expressionist German painting resonated with the development of modernist ideas and
forms in architecture. However, the question of the relationship of Cubist painting and
sculpture to architecture is not straightforward. Rather, Cubism was a point of departure,
contributing to the development of new concepts in Modern art.

In 1907 and 1908, Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, inspired by the aperspectival,
cubic treatment of space in the paintings of Paul Cézanne and by primitive African art,
developed a radically new approach to the object in their paintings. When they showed
their new paintings at the Salon des Indépendants in 1909, the critic Louis Vauxcelles
referred to Braque’s landscapes as “bizarreries cubiques.” Vauxcelles’ remark was
immediately adopted in Parisian art circles, giving a name to the new approach: Cubism.
Cubism represented a break with the painterly tradition since the Renaissance. The object
was not represented in the central perspective but rather was deconstructed into prismatic
surfaces, simultaneously representing different perspectives on the canvas. This formal
analysis reduced what was depicted to geometric elements, similar to the relationship
between words and syntax.

The new approach of Braque and Picasso quickly became a movement, as other artists,
each with his own interpretation of Cubist principles, joined in the experiment. Albert
Gleizes, Jean Metzinger, Robert Delaunay, the brothers Duchamp, Fernand Léger, Juan
Gris, and many others went through a shorter or longer Cubist period in their work.
Cubism also quickly spread beyond France, influencing art in many countries for some
time. The break with classical perspective and the composition of the image independent
of observation of nature opened up possibilities for abstract art, futurism, and other
movements. These developments took place very quickly between 1909 and 1915 and
were accompanied by changes in other art forms, including architecture and its theory, in
the years ahead. The new poetics expressed in Guillaume Apollinaire’s poem “Zone” of
1912 and the first atonal composition by Arnold Schoenberg of 1909 serve as examples
for poetry and music.

Architecture, however, remained relatively untouched by Cubist painting and
sculpture during this time with only two exceptions, and these were incidents rather than
profound stimulation for new architectural developments: the — project of Raymond
Duchamp-Villon (1912) and the work of the group (Group of the Visual Artists) in
Prague.

Duchamp-Villon (1876-1918) was a sculptor who belonged to a group of Cubist
artists in Puteaux, outside Paris. For the exhibition of the group’s work at the Salon
d’Automne in 1912, Duchamp-Villon and others presented the project, a kind of
(total work of art) complete with furniture and articles of use. For lack of space and
organizational problems, only the first story of the model was built in the Grand Palais.
This work is known only from pictures of the plaster model and charcoal drawings.

The two-story facade has a traditional, symmetrical arrangement. Cubist principles are
visible only in the details; traditional cornice and pillars, as well as the door and window


frames, were replaced by broken surfaces and prismatic shapes. These plastic forms are
abstract, and the overlap between them is the architectural equivalent of the painterly
principle of superimposed planes.

The was the attempt of a sculptor to apply the principles of contemporary painting
to architecture. By contrast the acceptance of Cubism by the group in Prague in 1911
was more systematic. Besides several painters and the sculptor Otto Guttfreund (1889—
1927), the architects Josef Chochol (1880-1957), Josef Gocar (1880-1945), and Pavel
Janak (1882-1956) were cofounders of the group. They were active in architecture,
interior design, arts and crafts, and set design and expressed themselves at the level of
theory.

The interest of these architects in the latest developments in painting represented a
reaction against the Wagner school’s dominant rationalism and leaning to social
engineering. Cubism seemed to offer an opening to a more artistic approach to
architecture. In 1910 Janak—himself one of Otto Wagner’s students—published an
article in the journal titled “From Modern Architecture to Architecture,” noting that
Modern architecture had an exclusively practical orientation and had no interest in
questions of space, material, and form.

However, the transposition of the principles of Cubist painting to architecture turned
out to be a formidable task because of fundamental differences in the two art forms. In
fact the Prague architects only adopted the principle of decomposition, that is, the
fragmented representation of the image, and applied it to the design of the facade. The
plane of the facade was undermined by slanting, prismatic forms that replaced the
traditional, orthogonal composition of the facade. The result was comparable to the detail
inthe . This approach had very little spatial significance, except in a few architectural
sketches and installations for exhibitions and in the Kurhaus at Bohdanec (health
administration building) (1911-12) by Gocar and the apartment building (1912) on
Neklan Street in Prague by Josef Chochol, which demonstrate a spatial application of
these principles. However, most of the architects concentrated on facades while their
plans remained conventional.

The underlying theory of the Prague group was different from Cubist painting. The
main objective was to achieve a plastic unity in the design of the facade through
dynamism and movement. They were concerned with movement in an abstract sense, as
an expression of the will to form, which subdues matter. These Czech architects saw the
Wagner school’s visible honesty in construction and use of material as imposed by
matter, materialist, and devoid of spiritual content. Historian Alois Riegl’s formulation of

(the will to art), in contradiction to the function, material, and technique of the artwork,
and the theories of Theodor Lipps and Wilhelm Worringer, which were based on the
subjective nature of observation and intuition, positioned themselves against the
rationalism and materialism of contemporary art theory in the same spirit.

Prague’s architectural Cubism, which became increasingly more formal and
decorative after 1914, and even became a sort of national style of the Czechoslovak
Republic between 1918 and 1925, in actuality brought forth an Expressionist
architecture—at least within the framework of architectural history, in which the notion
of Cubist architecture simply does not exist. From the point of view of aesthetic
conception and analysis of style, the Prague designs are related to the Amsterdam School
and to German Expressionism, with which it is sometimes possible to identify direct,

formal similarities. There are also formal similarities with the work of the Moscow group
Zhivskulptarch, which attempted the integration of painting, sculpture, and architecture
between 1918 and 1920 under the leadership of the Cubist sculptor Boris D.Korolyov.
The work of the architects Nikolai A.Ladovsky and Nikolai I.Istselenov from this short
period is distinctively Expressionist.

The significance of Cubism in painting to Expressionist architecture amounts to the
most definite, direct relationship be tween the two art forms. The causal connection rests
formally in the decomposed fragments and prismatic forms of Cubist painting, which led
to comparable three-dimensional forms in architecture. A deeper connection may reside
in the anticlassical aspect of Cubism, particularly the break with classical perspective
since the Renaissance. An anticlassical stance was also characteristic of Expressionism.

With respect to the relationship between modernist architecture and Cubism, it is
interesting that the protagonists of renewal in the 1920s sometimes took positions against
Cubism, or at least referred to it with considerable reserve, without identifying with it.
The purism of Amédée Ozenfant and Le Corbusier may have been a further development
following in the wake of Cubism, but their 1918 manifesto “Aprés le Cubisme” does not
evince much appreciation for the movement. The manifesto rejected Cubist principles
and called Cubism as a whole an esoteric game of ornamental forms. Instead, there is an
emphasis on rational arrangement in the construction of an image, on a sort of
standardization of the depicted object, and on the plastic values of the image. The purist
manifesto represented a return to the classical tradition; elements of purist painting are
significant for the architectural work of Le Corbusier, including the aesthetic concept of a
standard and the emphasis on plastic values.

The direct influence of Cubism on modernist architecture is more difficult to identify.
Although some authors, such as Sig-fried Giedion, Reyner Banham, and Colin Rowe, see
Cubist painting as an important impulse for the work of Le Corbusier and Walter
Gropius, that remains a matter of interpretation. Without a doubt the pathbreaking role of
Cubist painting in general led to an analogy with the pathbreaking role of modernist
architecture, but this would appear to be more a matter of legitimation than a causal
connection. Some aspects, such as the reduction of the object to geometric forms, spatial
penetration, and transparency, bear a programmatic relationship to the conception of
architecture of the pioneers of architectural modernism, but it is not clear whether these
derive from Cubism or whether they were discovered because of Cubism.

Historically speaking, these aspects of architecture cannot be traced back exclusively
to Cubism. The reduction of building volumes to geometric forms may as well be
connected to Roman church architecture or the work of Enlightenment architects Claude
Ledoux and Etienne Boullée. It was no accident that the work of Ledoux and Boullée
received attention in 1933, precisely in relation to Le Corbusier. Transparency in
architecture had earlier been applied in the iron-and-glass buildings of the engineers of
the 19th century, whereas in Cubist painting transparency is more conceptual than
visually present. Moreover, penetration and simultaneity in Cubist painting are closer to
deconstructivist architecture than to Gropius’s Bauhaus aesthetic. It is also possible to
doubt the exemplary nature of the supposed rational construction of the image of
analytical Cubism, already seen as not rational enough immediately after World War I.

Another problem that complicates the reception of Cubism in architecture is the
confusion between “Cubist” and “cubic.” As early as the 1920s, the word “cubist” was

applied by some writers to the new, unornamented architecture that relied on the
arrangement of stereometric volumes. The work of Adolf Loos, J.J.P.Oud, Willem
M.Dudok, and others has been called Cubist in this fashion, and as such the descriptor
seems to be a global designation of form rather than a connection to be French avant-
gardism in painting.

That contradictory pronouncements have been made about Cubism and architecture
may be related to the fact that the artistic revolution of Cubism was a symptom, not the
cause, of a new experience and interpretation of a changing world. A similar
phenomenon took place in other movements, and architecture was one of them.

_ OTAKAR MACEL
Amsterdam School; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard)
(France); De Stijl; Deconstructivism; Loos, Adolf (Austria); Wagner, Otto

(Austria)

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, London: Architectural Press, and New York: Praeger, 1960; see
especially chapter “Architecture and the Cubist Tradition”
Barr, Alfred Hamilton, | New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1936
Blau, Eve, and Nancy C.Troy (editors), | Montreal, Quebec: Canadian Centre for
Architecture, and Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1997
Burkhardt, Francois, “Notes on Cubism in Czech Architecture,” 20 (1978)
Golding, John, London: Faber, and New York: Wittenborn, 1959; 3rd edition,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, and London: Faber, 1988
Hamilton, George Heard, and William C.Agee, New York: Walker, 1967
Lamarova, Milena, “Cubism and Expressionism in Architecture and Design: The Prague
Cubist Group,” 20 (1978)
Margolius, Ivan, Newton Abbot, Devon, and North Pomfret, Vermont: David
and Charles, 1979
Ragghianti, Carlo L., “Architettura moderna e cubismo,” 9 (1962)

Svestka, Jiri (editor), Stuttgart, Germany: Hatje, and Diisseldorf, Germany:
Kunstverein, 1991
Vegesack, Alexander von (editor), Weil am Rhein, Germany: Vitra Design

Museum, 1991; as New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992

CULTURAL CENTRE JEAN-MARIE
TJIBAOU, NOUMEA, NEW CALEDONIA

Designed by Renzo Piano; completed 1998

Since the mid-19th century, the Melanesian island community of New Caledonia in
the South Pacific Ocean has been a French territory. Prized for its valuable nickel
deposits, sections of New Caledonia have been extensively mined by the French, leaving
the countryside a disturbing melange of natural landforms and man-made quarries. The
desire for cultural recognition became the catalyst for a strong Kanak nationalist
movement, which formed in the 1980s. However, despite growing French recognition of
the plight of the Kanak people, by 1988 the movement had been largely unsuccessful
political extremists assassinated. In the following year, civil unrest grew in New
Caledonia, among the Kanak leader, Jean-Marie Tjibaou, and several of his followers.
Tjibaou’s death, and the rift it symbolized between the French government and the native
Kanak people, led French President Mitterand to support the construction of a cultura.
center in New Caledonia as the first step in a process of political and cultura
reconciliation. A limited international architectural competition for the Tjibaou Cultura.
Centre was held in 1991, and a design from architect Renzo Piano and his Building
Workshop was awarded first prize.

The site for the building is a spectacular promontory on the Tina Peninsula at the
eastern edge of New Caledonia’s capital city, Nouméa. The promontory, a densely
vegetated strip of land, lies between a small lagoon and the Bay of Magenta. It is
sufficiently close to the city that it fulfills Tjibaou’s aims for such a center to be
accessible to urban Kanaks, yet it is also within the natural landscape. Piano’s winning
scheme features a picturesque, and perhaps romanticized, cluster of structures that closely
resemble overscaled traditional huts. In this preliminary scheme, these huts, or “cases,” as
they are known in French, are distributed around a narrow spine that runs along the ridge
of the promontory. Despite being criticized for its complex technical detailing and its
heavy-handed formal references to regional culture, Piano’s preliminary design was
strongly supported by the Kanak people, and work was begun on the project in 1992.

In its final form, as completed in 1998, the Tjibaou Cultural Centre consists of a
central open spine with three clusters of cases, ten in total, all to the southeastern side of
the spine. To the opposite side is a series of lower, rectilinear volumes, which are
recessed up to three stories deep into the site. The largest of these volumes, a 400-seat
theater, is also extended into the landscape to create an outdoor performance space. A
public car park is at one end of the promontory, and visitors approach the building
obliquely, first seeing the distinctive roof silhouette of the cases before rising up from the
lower, lagoon side to the main entry. The spine is entered, as is appropriate for a visitor to
a Kanak building, at right angles approximately one-third of the way along its length. An
underground tunnel, roughly parallel to the spine, provides for servicing to all areas of the
development.


Each of the ten cases is circular in plan and is clad, for three-quarters of its
circumference, in a double layer of vertical timber ribs that support a
system of in-fill panels comprising horizontal timber slats and glass and
timber louvers. The inner wall of timber ribs is vertical, whereas the outer
wall bows out from the base of the circle and is tied back at its apex like a
billowing timber sail. Both inner and outer ribs are cut away at the rear, or
lower, side adjacent to the circulation spine, and a steeply inclined circular
metal roof is supported on the inner wall. At their peaks the tallest of the
timber ribs reach a height of approximately 90 feet (28 meters) and are
clearly visible from the distance. All of the joints are steel, and the ribs are
constructed of iroko wood, which is naturally termite resistant and is able
to be laminated. The gap between the inner and outer rib walls is carefully
controlled to capture light winds to cool the structure while allowing the
interior to be sealed in the event of cyclones.

Cultural Centre Jean Marie Tjibaro, Nouméa, New Caledonia, by
Renzo Piano
© Tim Griffith/Esto

Internally, the cases house gallery spaces, a multimedia library, and several small lecture
theaters. The three clusters, although not as obvious as they are in the original scheme,
still divide the cases into different functional zones, with the public galleries toward the
northeast and the more private, or controlled, galleries to the southwest.

The cases, which come in three sizes, are the most visible and iconic elements of the
design. They recall the structure, texture, and spatial distribution of the traditional Kanak

village. They also have a natural tactility and level of detail that are similar to the
complexity of the surrounding vegetation (particularly the tall Norfolk Island pines). The
cases successfully evoke a regional cultural form, the Kanak village, without resorting to
kitsch representation and without demeaning local tradition. This is arguably the
buildings’ greatest success—they are both stridently modern in technology and detailing
yet able to capture some sense of the spirit of the land and its people. For this reason the
buildings are often identified with critical regionalist practices that reject overt mimicry
of traditional forms in favor of designs that capture some aspect of regional tectonics,
light quality, or spatial practices.

MICHAEL J.OSTWALD
Piano, Renzo (Italy)
Further Reading
Buchanan, Peter, Volume 2, London: Phaidon, 1995
Buchanan, Peter, Volume 4, London: Phaidon, 2000

Piano, Renzo, Barcelona: G. Gili, 1998

CURTAIN-WALL SYSTEM

The curtain wall, one of architecture’s most provocative metaphors, is surprisingly
difficult to pin down with a precise definition. Because it can be examined from multiple
perspectives—in terms of functional relationships, as an aesthetic object, or as a mass-
produced system available within the construction marketplace—some ambiguity is both
inevitable and provocative.

In the first case, the curtain wall is defined in terms of its functional relationship to the
building’s structure. It then refers to the cladding, or enclosure, of a building as
something both separate from and attached to the building’s skeletal framework. Where
load-bearing walls provide both structure and enclosure, there can be no curtain wall.
However, difficulties emerge within this first definition when the question of “in-fill” is
considered: are conventional windows (or other in-fill material), when fixed inside the
boundaries of a structural frame, considered to represent curtain-wall construction? Such
construction is certainly “attached” to the structural frame but not exactly “hanging” from
it. When is a window just a window within a frame, and when does it transform into a
curtain wall? The answer might have more to do with one’s aesthetic bias than with the
actual functional relationship between cladding and structure.

From a functional perspective, curtain walls necessarily appeared precisely at the same
time as skeletal frameworks—toward the end of the 19th century. Yet the first such walls
were often strikingly similar to the thick masonry walls that they might have been
expected to supersede. Although no longer load-bearing structures, relatively thick
masonry curtain walls continued to be used in steel-and concrete-framed buildings for

other reasons. First, thinner masonry walls—before the development of internal cavities
to block the migration of moisture through the wall—tended to have problems with water
penetration. Second, lighter facades consisting of metal or glass panels were often
considered aesthetically unsuitable for serious works of architecture because of a legacy
and tradition that linked monumental architecture to masonry construction. Third, the use
of more modern cladding alternatives required breakthroughs in environmental control
technologies—air conditioning and insulation being the most important—before they
could be deployed over large surface areas enclosing habitable spaces. Finally, building
code officials, increasingly sensitive to the real danger of urban conflagrations, prevented
the use of new, lightweight materials in exterior walls—even after other technical and
environmental issues had been addressed—if they were unable to match the proven fire
resistance of masonry.

Although defined initially in terms of its functional relationship to structure, toward
the middle of the 20th century the curtain wall began to be alternatively defined by its
function as an environmental filter—as a membrane mediating between desired interior
conditions and variable exterior circumstances. Sunscreens double glazing, and
pressure-equalized rain screens were among the functional responses to this concern,
culminating in the late 20th century’s technologically sophisticated “bioclimatic” designs.
In these “green” buildings, an array of computer- and user-controlled devices may be
embedded within the curtain wall to encourage the use of fresh air and natural daylighting
while at the same time aiming to improve user comfort, reduce energy consumption, and
promote a “sustainable” lifestyle.

Curtain walls can also be defined as the embodiment of an aesthetic intention—the
second of the three perspectives mentioned previously. Numerous such curtain-wal
themes can be identified in 20th-century architecture. They coalesce, in general, around
the revolutionary “new” materials of metal and glass: metal (as industrialized, mass-
produced, streamlined panel), glass (as transparent or reflective surface, crystalline solid,
or harbinger of an enlightened culture), or metal and glass com- bined (as woven “fabric”
or abstract grid). Still, other more traditional materials and systems, including stucco,
concrete, brick, and stone veneer, have also played a role in validating the curtain wal
within various aesthetic domains and not merely as the by-product of functiona.
considerations. The ideal of an all-glass skin perhaps was the most persistent curtain-wal
theme of the 20th century. Starting with metal window systems containing relatively
small glass panes and moving toward larger glass sizes with smaller mullion profiles, the
most technically advanced glass walls of the late 20th century managed to eliminate
mullions entirely, whether by using the glass itself as a structural material, relying on
structural sealant joints, or by pinning the glass to elegantly detailed lightweight stee:
substructures.


Willis Faber and Dumas Building
(1975), designed by Sir Norman Foster
and Michael Hopkins, Ipswich,
England

© Ken Kirkwood

Ironically, the initial aesthetic formulation of the modern metal-and-glass curtain wal
preceded the invention of multistory skeletal frameworks. Greenhouses were being built
in Europe, even in the mid-17th century, with large areas of glass divided by wooden, and
later iron, mullions. By the mid-19th century, skins of metal and glass were commonly
used for the roofs of markets, gallerias, and train stations. London’s Crystal Palace of
1851 was extremely influential not only in validating the architectural use of iron and
glass but also in foreshadowing its rationalization as an industrialized system.

It is as a system—the third perspective mentioned previously—that the curtain wal.
became widely available within the building construction marketplace. Early 20th-
century curtain walls tended to be unique and custom made, fabricated individually from
the cast iron, rolled steel, and plate glass that were just beginning to appear as
industrialized commodities. However, by the mid-1930s the emerging sheet-meta
technologies (and aesthetics) associated with the mass production of airplanes and
automobiles began to be seriously adapted to building construction, especially the
development of metal curtain-wall panels. Starting at the end of World War II, the 20th
century’s ubiquitous metal-and-glass curtain-wall systems—trepetitive grids of extruded
aluminum mullions and horizontal rails fastened to a building’s structural skeleton and
supporting panels of glass or metal—increasingly began to appear on commercial and
institutional buildings. The newly invented float process made large areas of glass even
more feasible beginning in the 1950s.

Other panelized curtain-wall systems also appeared as cladding options: these
included composite metal panels containing lightweight cores of honeycombed materia
or foam plastic insulation sandwiched between two layers of thin sheet metal (aluminum
or steel); precast concrete panels, custom designed for each job but still manufactured
within a rationalized, systematic production setting; and thin stone veneer panels, factory


cut to a thickness as little as one inch, then attached to the building’s structure using
proprietary metal clips and anchors. Even traditional brick and stucco became integrated
into manufactured curtain-wall systems: brick as part of layered cavity wall systems and
stucco, most commonly in the form of EIFS (exterior insulation and finish systems),
consisting of thin polymer-based plaster laminae applied with fiberglass reinforcing mesh
to a surface of rigid foam insulation. Among the numerous architects or designers
associated with the development of curtain-wall technology or its aesthetic refinement, a
partial list would include Nicholas Grimshaw, Norman Foster, Walter Gropius, Le
Corbusier, Richard Meier, Jean Nouvel, I.M.Pei, Cesar Pelli, Jean Prouvé, Peter Rice,
Kevin Roche, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Eero Saarinen, Ken Yeang, and the firm of
Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.

JONATHAN OCHSHORN

Further Reading

The history of curtain walls in 20th-century architecture may be pieced together from
readings in architectural histories and from monographs describing the work of individual
architects or designers. For the development of early 20th-century curtain walls in
Chicago, see Condit. A discussion of the rival cast-iron tradition may be found in Gayle.
For a general text examining modern curtain-wall systems, see Sands. An overview of
curtain-wall systems may be found in Allen. Discussion and details of early “modernist”
20th-century curtain walls are in Ford. For examples of state-of-the-art “glass walls,” see
Bramante as well as Rice and Dutton. For details of a more recent oeuvre incorporating
metal curtain-wall panels, see Flagge and Hamm. For examples of “green” curtain-wall
designs, see Yeang and Davies and Lambot.

Allen, Edward, New York: Wiley, 1985; 3rd edition, 1999

Bramante, Gabriele, London: Phaidon, 1993
Condit, Carl W., | Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952; revised edition, as
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964
Davies, Colin, and Ian Lambot, Boston: Birkhauser, 1997
Flagge, Ingeborg, and Oliver Hamm (editors), | Berlin: Ernst und Sohn, 1997
Ford, Edward R., 2 vols., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990
Gayle, Margot, and Carol Gayle, New York: Norton, 1998
Huber, Benedikt, and Jean-Claude Steinegger (editors), London: Pall Mall Press,
and New York: Praeger, 1971
Rice, Peter, and Hugh Dutton, Paris: Editions du Moniteur, 1990; 2nd edition, 1995; as
London: Spon, 1995
Sands, Herman, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986
Yeang, Ken, London: Artemis, 1994

CZECH, HERMANN 1936-

Architect, Austria

Early on, Hermann Czech studied architecture, philosophy, and film while working as
a theorist and publicist of architecture. The Viennese architects Adolf Loos and Josef
Frank left a lasting impression on his theory and, subsequently, on his work. Czech’s
development as an architect was further influenced by the architectural work of
Arbeitsgruppe 4 and the theoretical positions of Konrad Wachsmann.
According to Kenneth Frampton, Czech’s work reflects a subtle mixture
ofa postulation of oblique ironies and a directly reflected modest reality.
His field of intervention is the interior of the building that, after
completion, looks like nothing has happened. However, at the same time,
these spaces display residual qualities available for the distraction of the
inattentive mind. In 1980 Czech wrote, “Architecture is not life.
Architecture is

Kleines Café I (Little Cafe I), Vienna
(1970)

© Hermann Czech, Vienna. Photo
Celeste M. Williams and Dietmar
E.Froehlich

background. Everything else is not architecture” (Czech, in Frampton, 1980).

In his Kleines Café/Little Café (1970, 1973-74; Vienna), Czech realizes the concept
of a (a mixed function of café and bar), which he inserted in an existing building in
downtown Vienna and successively expanded and restructured until 1985. The
multiangled, mazelike wall structure and the tiny floor space necessitated interventions to
visually expand the space, thus engaging in a playful use of architectural vocabulary. The
design of the stairs and the doors recalls Loos’s _ tradition.

Other restaurants with “new urban” interiors are the Wunder-Bar (1976; Vienna),
Restaurant Salzamt (1981-83; Vienna), and the restaurant in the Kurhaus Baden-Baden
(1988), which show his concept of “many-layered-ness,” where he is trying to find a link
with history by means of the introduction of elements that in their turn speak of this
history. His method of irony suggests a sophisticated relationship through the appropriate
architectural means.

Czech’s universal outlook rejects a falsely exceptional architecture. Instead, frugality,
discretion, and community-mindedness are the main characteristics of his position, as
exemplified in the restaurant in the Schwarzenberg Palace (1982-84; Vienna). Here he
converted the lower ground floor of the palace, solving the problems regarding kitchen,
servicing, and ban queting previously prevalent in all the floors. The plan’s organization,
the vaults, and the relationships of all the levels yielded an exemplary architectural and
preservational achievement referencing not the ideal baroque palace but the historical
reality of constant change over time.

Similar are his intentions in the MAK Café (1991-93) in the Museum of Applied Arts
in Vienna, where, inside an old space of the museum, the café corrects the lack of
connection with the street by having all the new elements point to the immediate
surroundings or to the city. The space itself remains almost untouched except for the two
new bar stands pointing toward the new exit to the museum garden. Fixed and mobile
partitions separate the café from the restaurant. Here again, Loos’s ambiguous and erratic
statements are placed into a new field of reference through Czech’s ironic quotations.

Perception is forced to acknowledge more than the image of an object in his Dicopa
Offices (1974-75) in Vienna, a complex restructuring and remodeling of offices with
support spaces, all set in a tiny space of a historic building. The “not true to scale,”
almost urbanistic spaces are justified by their “service” value.

Czech’s buildings want to appear as a spontaneous reaction to different needs: the idea
of Josef Frank’s “accidentism” (adaptation to circumstances) in the formation of the
environment forms the central issue in Czech’s architecture. The design be-comes a
“nonevent” seeking to blend into its surroundings. This position rejects types and
systems, replacing them with the concern for the real, which can be seen early on in his
House M. (1977-81) in Schwechat, where he again interprets Loos’s and Frank’s
“accidentism.” The interwoven sequence of interior spaces flows around a skeletal
system with four columns reaching through the whole house. The stairs also wind around
the verticality of the columns, constantly changing the spatial quality and meaning of the
stairs.

Czech’s architecture sometimes is called a silent architecture, an architecture at second
sight, or a veiled architecture that does not reveal itself immediately, where one is
encouraged to look behind the veil to uncover the world. Czech’s own approach to
architecture could be compared with his assessment of Frank’s dialectic position that

architecture is anchored
general.

in the ideal and in the real, in the personal as well as in the

In his Apartment Building Petrusgasse (1985-89) in Vienna, Czech shows that
subsidized housing should behave neutrally toward later modifications. The units can be

joined vertically and hori
and relationships. Accord

zontally. Functions do not primarily guide the layout of rooms
ing to Czech, such a building can become the expression of its

contents in time only through adaptation or interpretation—it has to remain silent at first.
The expression of an apartment building, for example, can come only through the users.
Czech is trying to retrieve and recompose fragments to constitute an architecture better

attuned to the existing, a

ind of “self-developing and regenerating” architecture. Despite

his position of “spontaneity,” Czech is manipulating the fragments skillfully and with
artifice to create architecture that is superimposing cultured tradition on the everyday.

Czech has been called
discreet and the formally

a determined and complicated architect, designing between the
excessive. He seems to work independent of trends, continuing

to develop his own architectural language as he goes forward. The meaning of his
elements is ever changing because of unusual syntactic relationships.

The design concept for the Rosa-Jochmann-School (1991-94) in Vienna
reveals itself in the interior rather than on the surface. Functional
considerations were behind this merging of the corridor and the hall
school type; the tracts of this elementary school form two interior
courtyards, with the classrooms being organized in small groups. Access

to the school is via th
ground level. An-

e first floor, using a bridge coming from the upper

Residential and office development (enclosing
a subway terminal track for turnback
operation), Vienna (1997) © Harald
Schoenfellinger, Vienna. Photo Celeste

M. Williams and Dietmar E. Froehlich

other sensitive and multilayered approach to the task at hand can be revisited in his Bank
Austria Client Service Center renovation (1992-97) in Vienna. The building was finished
in 1915, becoming one of the first reinforced-concrete-skeleton buildings with a classicist
facade in Vienna. Having been damaged during World War II, it was undergoing its first
major renovation in the 1970s. In 1991 the building became the headquarters of the bank,
the entry was moved, and a new staircase accessed the new teller lobby. The traditional
entry and the three naves of the teller lobby remained in their entirety, whereas the former
offices were integrated into the main space, where a new mezzanine level transforms the
space into an office landscape.

Czech, who also designs exhibits and furniture, is working with the self-evident and
the accidental in his writings as well as in his buildings. Nevertheless, his architecture is
always “guided” by spatial thinking that takes into account the overall urban and
architectural context.

DIETMAR E.FROEHLICH AND CELESTE
M.WILLIAMS

Biography

Born in Vienna, 10 November 1936. Studied architecture at the Technical University and
the Akademie der Bildenden Kiinste, Vienna; studied film at the Hochschule fiir Musik
und Darstellende Kunst, Vienna 1954-56; studied philosophy, University of Vienna
1957-60. Architecture critic, Vienna 1963-67; correspondent, Tokyo 1963-67.
Assistant professor, Kunstgewerbeschule, Vienna 1974. Visiting professor at numerous
universities.

Selected Works

Restaurant Ballhaus, Vienna, 1962

Subway network design for Vienna (with Arbeitsgruppe 4), 1967

Kleines Café, Vienna, 1970, 1974

Apartment Klemmer, Vienna, 1972

Antiquariat Loecker und Woegenstein, Vienna, 1973, 1979

Office renovation Dicopa, Vienna, 1975

Wunder-Bar, Vienna, 1976

Addition to Villa Pflaum, Altenberg, 1979

Interior for M. and H.Poeschl, Vienna, 1980

Art Dealership/Gallery Hummel, Vienna, 1980

House M., Schwechat, 1981

Restaurant Salzamt, Vienna, 1982

House S., Vienna, 1983

Underground renovation (restaurant, bar, lobby, kitchen, staff rooms, banquet halls),
Schwarzenberg Palace, Vienna, 1984

City Park Bridge, Vienna, 1987

General planning of U3-West (subway), Vienna, 1988
Kurhaus, Baden-Baden, Germany, 1988

Store Arcadia in Vienna State Opera, 1988

Apartment Building Petrusgasse, Vienna, 1989

Housing Wien Ottakring, 1990

Café in Museum for Applied Arts (MAK-Café), Vienna, 1993
Glazing (“greenhouse”) of loggia of Vienna State Opera, 1994
Housing Brunnergasse, Perchtoldsdorf/Vienna, 1994
Rosa-Jochmann-School (elementary school), Vienna, 1994

Renovation Bank Austria, 1997

Selected Publications

“Das Wiener U-Bahn-Netz als Entwurfsproblem,” (January—February 1968)
“Christopher Alexander und die Wiener Moderne,” (March 1984)
“The Diction of Otto Wagner,” (July 1977)

“The Loos Idea,” (May 1978)

“On Rigour,” 8 (1989)

“A Mode for the Current Interpretation of Josef Frank,” (November 1991)
“Selbstkritik der Moderne,” in catalogue (1995)

“Zur Abwechslung,” Vienna: Locker Verlag, 1996

Further Reading

Achleitner, Friedrick, “Franks weiter wirken in der neueren Wiener Architekur,”
(August 1986)
Almaas, Ingerid Helsing, London: Ellipsis, 1995
Almaas, Ingerid Helsing, | London: Ellipsis, 1997
Frampton, Kenneth (editor), New York: Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies,
1980
Gijsberts, Pietar Jan, “Architecktuur als Achtergrond. Theorie en Werk van Hermann
Czech,” (November 1990)
(exhib. cat.), London: 9H Gallery, 1987
“Hermann Czech—The Architectonic Object: A Monograph of His Works,” 6 (1996)
(special issue)
Mostaedi, Arian, Barcelona: Carlos Bcoto and Josep M.Minguet, 1999
Ohta, Yasuhito, “‘Museums of the World’ Series: The Ultimate in Networking 2: From
Museums for Objects to Museums for Space,” 395/8 (August 1997)
Steiner, Dietmar, “An Amalgam of Adaptation and Rejection: On the Continuity of
Viennese Architecture,” 5 (1983)
Steiner, Dietmar, “Beyond Vienna,” in edited by Wilfried Wang, New York: Rizzoli,
and Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1988
“Vienna and ‘Vienna,’” 29 (1981) (special issue)

CZECH REPUBLIC AND
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

The Slavic people, from whom the Czechs and Slovaks originated, have inhabited the
territory of 20th-century Czechoslovakia since the 5th century. The Tatar and Turkish
invasions and occupations over previous countries did not kill the spirit of the Czech and
Slovak people, who, divided for 11 centuries, were unified in the 20th century. Despite
centuries of ethnic oppression, and Germanization and Hungarization by foreign rulers,
the language, culture, and national identity of the Czechs and Slovaks have survived.

The new republic of Czechoslovakia arose from the ruins of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire in 1918 after World War I. The accord between the Czechs and the Slovaks was
ratified in the Cleveland and the Pittsburgh declarations. The founders of the republic
were its first president, Tomas Masaryk, and Garrigue Milan Rastislav Stefanik. The
foundation of democratic principles gave the intellectuals of the young republic a new
platform of liberal ideology. Influential in the cultural sphere was the Devetsil (the Nine
Powers), an avant-garde group of artists, writers, architects, musicians, and actors, started
in 1920 in Prague and in 1923 in Brno. Architect Josef Havlicek was one of the founding
members, and the activist writer and graphic designer Karel Tiege was the leader of the
group. They published a journal and organized lectures and exhibitions. The ARDEV (the
Architects of Devetsil) members maintained contact with a number of representatives of
the international avant-garde and invited them to visit and lecture in Czechoslovakia.
Among them were Theo van Doesburg, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Jacobus Johannes Pieter
Oud, Walter Gropius, Le Corbusier, Amédée Ozenfant, and Adolf Loos. The visits of
Loos, a native of Brno, were particularly influential. The ARDEV members, concerned
with the situation of social housing, produced studies of communal housing. These ideas
came from the socialist ideals of Soviet Constructivism. In 1932 Karel Tiege, who was
also an art critic and a theorist of architecture, summarized the housing studies in his
book (The Smallest Flat).

At the turn of the 20th century, Czech, Moravian, and Slovak architects contributed to
Art Nouveau. Czech Art Nouveau architecture was not based merely on an endeavor to
dispense with historicism and to create original and independent principles of form and
decorative elements of new style. A pupil of the Viennese modernist architect Otto
Wagner, Prague architect Jan Kotera (1871-1923), preferred a functional layout and
volume to counter the aesthetics of eclecticism. Simultaneously, Kotera emphasized
truthfulness in architecture to counter a slavish imitation of historical motifs. He required
a creative search for the new. Finally, Kotera’s design principles emphasized a building’s
purpose and the clear expression of its structural elements. In 1910 Kotera was appointed
professor of architecture at the Academy of Fine Arts in Prague. His teaching was very
influential on the new generation of architects in Bohemia (Czechia).

In the midst of Art Nouveau, the evolution of modern Czech architecture was
characterized by a rather homogeneous design philosophy noted for its rationalism. Apart
from the work of Kotera, this rationalism is seen in the designs of the rest of the pioneers
of Czech modern architecture (Otakar Novotny, Josef Gocar, and Pavel Janak), Slovak
modern architecture (Dusan Jurkovic, Michal Harminc, and Emil Bellus), and Moravian


modern architecture (Ammost Wiesner, Jan Visek, Jiri Kroha, and Bohuslav Fuchs). Their
familiarity with the progressive ideas of Otto Wagner, Adolf Loos, P.H.Berlage, Henry
van de Velde, Tony Garnier, Auguste Perret, and Peter Behrens fueled the process.
Kotera consistently enhanced serviceability and simplicity of form, using traditional
building materials. His first significant Art Nouveau building, the Peterka House (1899—
1900) on Wenceslas Square in Prague, is a mixed-use row building. Other notable Art
Noveau projects include the National House in Prostejov, the Chamber of Commerce
Pavilion (1908) at the exhibition in Prague, and the Municipal Museum (1906-12) in
Hradec Kralove.

Kotera’s significant residential architecture also includes the Laichter Apartment
House (1908-09) and his own villa (1908-09), both in Prague, noteworthy for their
careful fenestration and brick and stucco finishes. Similarly, in the Laichter Apartment
House, the materials for the five-story structure are brick and stucco. Devoid of any
embellishment, the asymmetrical composition of the building’s plan and corresponding
facade features an offset cantilevered mass. The restraining simplicity and the lack of
decor distinguish these designs.

The Mozarteum (Urbanek Department Store, 1912-13) in Prague is a symmetrical
composition separated from its neighbors by a rectangular concrete frame topped by a
triangular gable. The building’s dynamic facade is a precedent to Kotera’s Cubist period.
His 1913 entry in the competition for the monument to Zizka on Vitkov Hill in Prague
represents an articulate application of the Cubist language widely accepted among Czech
modernists.

The search for a new architecture preoccupied many early 20th-century architects.
Social and political changes were accompanied by a search for national identity.
Architects returned to their ancestral origins for elements specific to the people and their
region. Architect Dusan Jurkovic (1868-1947) relied on traditional peasant wooden
architecture. He was interested in the indigenous architecture of villages and in the Arts
and Crafts movement. After studies in Vienna, Jurkovic’s first built works were the
mountain resort buildings located in Radhost and Rezek. In his Luhacovice Spa (1902-
03), the half-timber construction buildings for lodging, dining, and services were
designed in the Art Nouveau style. During World War I, in 1916-18, Jurkovic designed
for the military command in Krakow a series of soldier cemeteries, monuments, and
grave markers located in southeastern Poland. Here, inspired by the indigenous
architecture, he used carved wood. A singularly important work of Jurkovic’s is the
Memorial to General Stefanik (1925-28) at Bradlo. Working conscientiously with the
landscape, Jurkovic designed stations (1936-38) for the cable car to the Lomnicky
(peak) in the High Tatras. A leader in modern architecture in Slovakia, Jurkovic designed
the four stations by combining the natural features of each site with the demands of
technical operations and human habitation.

Architect Vladimir Karfik (1901-96) apprenticed with both Le Corbusier (1924-25)
and Frank Lloyd Wright (1927-29). From 1930 to 1946, he was the chief architect of the
Bata Company, where he developed “Zlin Architecture,” based on an efficient and
economic construction system of a distinctive industrial image applied to a variety of
building types. The Zlin Architecture construction system was used for a number of one-
factory towns in Czechoslovakia and abroad. After World War IL Karfik was appointed


to the new school of architecture at the Slovak Technical University in Bratislava, where
he was one of the most influential professors.

The history of Czechoslovakia has been tumultuous. In 1938 Nazi Germany forced the
European powers to agree to divide the country into a Czech protectorate and the Slovak
Republic. After World War II, Czechoslovakia reunited, but soon the population faced
another catastrophe with the communist political takeover in February 1948, when the
Soviet government took over Czechoslovakia. Architects had to give up private offices to
become employees in large state-controlled design institutes. Functionalism was
condemned as an expression of a bourgeois cosmopolitanism.

Despite the oppressive conditions, extraordinary buildings were designed under the
totalitarian regime. The 1969 International Union of Architects (UIA) Perret Award was
given to the Television Tower (1963—71) on Jested Hill near Liberec, designed by Karel
Hubacek. Hubacek started a groundbreaking architectural office in Liberec, Atelier SIAL,
which now runs an architecture school. From this office came the project of the
Department Store Maj (1973-75) in Prague, designed by Miros-lav Masak (b. 1932),
Martin Rajnis (b. 1944), and Johnny Eisler (b. 1946). The husband-and-wife team of Jan
Sramek (1924-78) and Alena Sramkova (b. 1929) designed the Main Train Station
(1972-79) and the CKD Building (1976-83), both in Prague.

The carefully sited crematorium (1967) in Bratislava by Ferdinand Milucky broke out
of socialist realism. For his work Milucky was awarded the prestigious Herder Prize in
1999. A prolific designer, Jan Bahna made a number of proposals for revitalization of
Bratislava, among them the Department Store Dunaj (1990-92), designed with Fedor
Minarik, Lubomir Zavodny, and Martin Fabry. The young Prague architects known as the
Golden Eagles, the D.A. Studio, and the Brno group of the Municipal House have also
been rediscovering the heritage of Czechoslovak functionalism of the interwar period.
This can be seen in the Fitness Center (1991) in Ceske Budejovice by Jiri Stritecky and
Martin Krupauer, the Riviera Swimming Pool (1986-92) in Brno by Petr Hrusa, and the
Rowing Race Course (1989) at Racice by Zbysek Styblo, Tomas Kulik, and Jan Louda.

Czechoslovakia had contributed significantly to the international fairs, including the
all-glass pavilion built for the 1937 Paris Exhibition by Jaromir Krejcar (1895-1949). At
the 1958 World Expo in Brussels, the pavilion designed by Frantisek Cubr (1911-76),
Josef Hruby (1906-88), and Zdenek Pokorny (1909-84) won the award for the most
visited exhibition.

Several architects have contributed to 20th-century architecture in Czechoslovakia.
These include the Villa Mueller (1928-30) in Prague by Adolf Loos, the Villa Tugendhat
(1928-30) in Brno by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the synagogue (1928-31) in Zilina by
Peter Behrens, the Villa Palicka (1932) in Prague by Mart Stam, and the National
Netherlands Building (1992-95), known as the Fred and Ginger, in Prague by Frank
Gehry and Vladimir Milunic.

PETER LIZON
Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Loos, Adolf (Austria); Prague, Czech
Republic; Tugendhat House, Brno, Czech Republic


D

DARMSTADT, GERMANY

The Darmstadt artists’ colony was founded in West Germany in 1899 by Grand Duke
Ernst Ludwig von Hessen of Darmstadt, grandson of Queen Victoria and the last ruler of
the formerly independent state, which became part of the German Empire in 1871. Ernst
Ludwig was one of the most influential of the new patrons of contemporary architecture
and design movements in the early 20th century. He was familiar with the English Arts
and Crafts movement because of his frequent trips to England and his having already
commissioned Baillie Scott in 1897 to design furniture and interior decorations for the
dining and drawing rooms of his palace at Darmstadt. C.R.Ashbee was invited to design
the light fittings, and his Guild and School of Handicraft in London was asked to make
both furniture and fittings. The colony was a response to a memorandum prepared for the
parliament and important local people by Alexander Kock, proprietor of a local wallpaper
factory. He and others acknowledged the important role that the applied arts might play
in future economic development. Aware of English developments, the memorandum
included ideas for the development of homes for artists and ateliers for applied art. Seven
artists were invited to form the colony on the Matildehdhe, and they were to design and
direct the production of goods by other craftspeople and workshops. The outcomes were
published and promoted by Kock through his journals, and the latter a German
imitation of the English . Twenty-three artists worked there at various times from 1899
to 1914, when the venture ceased.

Parklike grounds (already containing a reservoir), the Russian Chapel, and a number
of villas were offered by Ernst Ludwig. The colony was to be a “living and working
world” and to form a public exhibition, (A Document of German Art), to be held in
1901. The intention was to show the public a model style of home decoration in
individually designed artists’ houses. The artists—Hans Christiansen, Paul Biirck, Patriz
Huber, Josef Olbrich, Peter Behrens, Ludwig Habich, and Rudolf Bosselt—were given a
three-year contract and a housing subsidy, although they had to pay construction costs
themselves. Work started immediately, and the resulting villa suburb formed the main
part of the exhibition, creating an event in the field of architecture and interior decoration
that bore witness both to the individuality of the members and to the collective strength
of the colony. Olbrich organized the layout of the exhibition in 1901, designing most of
the buildings himself. Architecture included not only Olbrich’s Ermst-Ludwig-Haus, the
artistic center, and a theater but also various temporary structures and the artists’ houses
themselves. Writings of the artists reveal that they were concerned with aesthetic rather

than functional considerations. No reference is made to machinery, mass production, or
cost-effectiveness in projects undertaken by the colony. In one of three articles on the
Darmstadt colony by W. Fred in Behrens gave a cogent analysis of the aims of the Arts
and Crafts in Germany: “Architecture is the art of building, and comprises in its name
two ideas: the mastery of the practical and the art of the beautiful. There is always
something exhilarating in being able to combine in one word the two ideas—that of
practical utility and that of abstract beauty—which unfortunately have too often been
opposed to each other.” The architecture and design at the colony showed progressive
unification of the practical and the beautiful, going beyond the possibilities of artistic
hand production to the wider field of industry.

Built on a gradient, the two-story Ernst-Ludwig-Haus, a long, low, shedlike design
with unbroken walls, dominates the other buildings. Its principal feature is the omega-
shaped central doorway, with richly painted and gilded stucco decoration, flanked by
Ludwig Habich’s colossal statues of Adam and Eve. The two bronze figures in the door
niches, goddesses of victory by Bosselt, harmonize well with Olbrich’s gold decoration
behind them. Internally, the upper story contained a central hall, intended for small
exhibitions. To the right and left, several colonists had two rooms each, placed one
behind the other, to provide useful, well-lit spaces. The lower story contained living
rooms for the bachelors along with the general fencing, gymnastic, and recreational
rooms.

Grouped around the atelier were the private houses, which adhere to two basic types:
(1) a narrow design with large, pitched roofs and irregularly placed windows with small
panes, derived largely from English Domestic Revival work, and (2) those with flat,
veranda-like roofs, developed by Wagner and Hoffmann, that echo the simplicity of the
Italian villa. The Villa Habich is reminiscent of Hoffmann’s Villa Henneberg (1900) near
Vienna, with its emphasis on the square block of the house with larger windows, sudden
projection, and a flat roof extending far out over the walls. The Gliickert II house is a
compromise between the two types.

The exterior and interior decoration witness the diversity and richness of Olbrich’s

vocabulary, in which he repeats linear border patterns and mold forms derived from
nature into stucco and plaster. All his designs provide interesting color harmonies and
demonstrate a simplification of form, tending toward geometry, but all bear the hallmark
of quality, craftsmanship, and respect for materials. The first story of Olbrich’s own
house had glazed tiles on the facade.
Behrens designed his own small villa, employing a compact plan. The exterior shows
the free interpretation of vernacular forms combined with an attempt at structural
rationalism that contrasts with the picturesqueness of Olbrich. He employed brick and
green terra-cotta tiles to invoke the vernacular of the Baltics, which he admired.
Internally, curvilinear echoes of Art Nouveau are outweighed by simplified forms that are
more in accordance with contemporary Viennese trends. The pavement running between
the artists’ houses is designed in a black-and-white linear geometric pattern, formed out
of small flat cobbles and serving to unite the individually designed villas.

The exhibition of 1901 was a financial failure, and the critical reception was mixed,
although it was recognized as an important point in the development of German design.
A less ambitious exhibition followed in 1904, responding to the criticism that objects
were too expensive and sometimes “eccentric.” Olbrich created a “group of three houses”


representing average homes. Here, modest shapes, simple motifs, and plainer materials
recalled vernacular work.
The colony was represented at the Paris Exhibition of 1900, at Turin in 1902, and at
St. Louis in 1904. In 1907, Olbrich designed the Hochzeitsturm (Wedding Tower) and
the Municipal Exhibition Halls as the crowning feature of the Mathildenhéhe site. The
motif of a five-fingered hand raised in benediction, with its asymmetrically placed
banded windows running around the comers, is thought to have influenced Gropius’
design for the Chicago Tribune Tower competition entry of 1922. Architects such as
Behrens demonstrated their talents in designing architecture, furniture, silver, jewelry,
glass, and porcelain. Behrens left the colony in 1903 and, as was the case of many others
who had begun their careers at Darmstadt, enjoyed national and international acclaim.

A final exhibition was organized at Darmstadt in 1914. Albin Miller, who took over
the artistic management after Olbrich’s death, designed new buildings and facilities
specifically for this purpose. These were destroyed in 1944.

HILARY J.GRAINGER

Further Reading

Bott, Gerhard, Ingrid Dennerlein, and Carl Benno Heller, Darmstadt, Germany:
Roether, 1965; 2nd edition, revised by Carl Benno Heller, 1976
6 vols., Darmstadt, Germany: Roether, 1977-79

DE CARLO, GIANCARLO 1919

Architect, planner, and writer, Italy

Architect and planner, educator and editor, writer and speaker, thinker and innovator,
Giancarlo De Carlo is well known in his native Italy and abroad as a founder of Team X
and as a pioneer in participatory architecture. Born in Genoa, the son of a naval engineer,
he studied structural engineering at Milan Polytechnic from 1939 to 1943. On graduation,
he was called for naval service to Greece. In Milan from 1943 to 1945, De Carlo was
active in the Resistance movement and in anti-Fascist circles together with Giuseppi
Pagano, Franco Albini, and other members of the Movimento di Unita Proletaria. At the
same time, his interest in architecture was stimulated by Le Corbusier’s and Alfred
Roth’s _ . Following the end of World War II, De Carlo published critical works on Le
Corbusier and William Morris. From 1948 to 1949, De Carlo studied at the Venice
School of Architecture and collaborated with Albini on the development plan for Reggio
Emilia.

De Carlo’s career in both architecture and city planning was launched in the 1950s,
together with his expanding intellectual circles, the latter including Carlo Doglio, Delfino
Insolera, and Italo Calvino. In addition, he was briefly a member of the editorial board of

. A participant in CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne), De Carlo
became known as a modernist who honored the heritage of the past.

Few architects who emerged in the generation following World War II have been as
prescient in perceiving the problems and possible solutions in contemporary architecture
and urbanism. Both part of and counter to the mainstream, De Carlo has succeeded
because of his deeply embedded historical consciousness and his total immersion in the
problems of contemporary society. A master craftsman, De Carlo harbors enormous
respect for technological inventions and the design principles of modernism, including its
Utopian goals. Nonetheless, he has protested against the rigidity of the Modern
movement and the International Style. In his multifaceted career, however, his name will
inevitably be linked with Urbino, the hill town in the Marches, where Renaissance
architecture reached its summit in Federigo da Montefelto’s Ducal Palace. His work in
Urbino is ongoing, beginning with his master plan and now clearly visible in his
buildings for the University of Urbino.

When international modernism was at its zenith, De Carlo condemned the
preoccupation with style divorced from the social realities of the day.
While remaining open to the enriched possibilities of Postmodernism, he
decried its superficiality, even frivolity. In fact, he believed that
architecture was too important to be limited to the narrow domain of
architects. Rather, it is the architect’s “responsibility” to humanity that
constitutes the basis of their life and work. Evidence of this creed is found
in De Carlo’s housing complexes, where he encourages participation
between architect and users, a type of collaborative planning fully
cognizant of the needs of inhabitants. Mindful of the inhumanity—and
severe lack—of postwar housing, with its disregard for scale, social
realities, and historical circumstances, he challenged the idea of
“minimum living standard” as set forth at the CIAM conference in
Frankfort (1929). Instead, De Carlo advocated an architecture based on
current problems, one that considered the urban context as the primary
force.

Still, a paradigm for architect/client collaboration is the Village Matteotti (1969-74) in
the industrial town of Terni, 60 miles northeast of Rome. Meetings with the steelworkers
and their families led to a continuous partnership in planning with the architect, who
assumed the role of educator as well as designer and builder. Here, every phase of the
project was considered in conjunction with the users, who were directly involved in all
phases of construction. When completed, the Village Matteotti raised the standard for
workers’ housing. Unlike Terni, the housing at Mazzorbo, begun in 1950 on an island in
the Venetian lagoon, focused primarily on morphological considerations. Because of the
distinct identity of Mazzorbo’s residents, De Carlo emphasized the unique setting and a
strong vernacular tradition in his effort to design new forms that evoke the past by
articulating it and enriching it with the use of local color and variety in building types and
plans.

Beginning with his town plan (1958-64), De Carlo’s work in Urbino continues to this
day. It was the Collegio del Colle, the dormitories for the University of Urbino (1962—
66), that initiated the dialogue between the old city and its surroundings. Additions to the
college from 1973 created patterns that conform to the topography of the landscape,
always simulating the memory of earlier times and fostering a greater sense of
community among the students.

Many of De Carlo’s proposals have since come to fruition: restoring the Mercatale,
reviving the old approach from Rome, and providing access to students and tourists along
Francesco di Giorgio’s 15th-century ramp (discovered while restoring the 19th-century
theater) leading to the Ducal Palace. Abandoned buildings have been rehabilitated and
converted to modern facilities. Brilliant insertions in the town fabric are demonstrated by
the glass-enclosed hemicycle of the School of Education, which seems to be carved from
the surrounding walls, and the courtyard of the Law School, its domes illuminating the
spaces below. Contradictions between inside and outside contribute to the continuity
between old and new.

Aside from appointments as visiting professor at Yale University, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cornell University, and the University of California at Berkeley,
De Carlo was professor in the schools of architecture at the Universities of Venice and
Genoa. In 1976 he founded the ILAUD (International Laboratory for Architecture and
Urban Design). This forum of international students meets annually in an Italian city,
such as Urbino or Siena, to develop projects for the adaptive reuse of old buildings, such
as the Hospital of Santa Maria della Scala in Siena, the renewal of industrial areas in
Genoa, or new interventions in the Arsenal in Venice. In addition to these pursuits, De
Carlo, always a prolific writer, founded an Italian/English quarterly journal that
addresses global architectural topics.

Since 1995 De Carlo has entered competitions for the School of Architecture in
Venice and for the redesign of three piazzas in Trieste. Recent projects include university
facilities, civic works, and conversions in Pavia, Siena, Catania, the Republic of San
Marino, Lastre a Signe, Pistoia, Venice Lido, and Urbino. The latter includes the “Data of
Francesco di Giorgio,” and the restoration and transformation of a city observatory into a
multimedia center. It is little wonder that De Carlo has been made an honorary citizen of
Urbino and that, on the occasion of his 80th birthday in 1999, he was given the key to the
city of Venice.

ACIAM delegate from 1952 to 1959, a member of Team X, and an honorary member
of the American Institute of Architects from 1975, the American Academy for Arts and
Sciences from 1978, and the Royal Institute of British Architects from 1981, De Carlo
has been the recipient of prestigious awards, including the Patrick Abercrombie Prize
(1963), the Wolf Prize (1988), the Gold Medal of the City of Milan (1995), and the
Grand Prix “A/mbiente” in Buenos Aires (1999). In addition, De Carlo has been awarded
the from the Oslo School of Architecture, the Heriot-Watt University in Edinburgh, the
Université Catholique-Louvain, the Université de Genéve, the Buenos Aires School of
Architecture, and the Faculty of Humanities in Catania. On the occasion of receiving the
Royal Gold Medal of the RIBA (1993), De Carlo spoke of “promising signs ...emerging
from our present state of confusion.” Proving to be both realist and idealist, he hopes that
“perhaps organizing and giving form to the three-dimensional physical space will become
architecture’s raison d’étre once more.”


NAOMI MILLER

Biography

Born in Genoa, Italy, 12 December 1919. Studied structural engineering, Milan
Polytechnic; degree in engineering 1943; attended the Institute of Architecture, Venice
1948-49; degree in architecture 1949. Private practice, Milan from 1950; member, Team
X 1952-59; member, Italian Group of CIAM 1952-59; assistant editor, magazine
1954—56; founder, ILAUD (International Laboratory of Architecture and Urban Design)
1975; director, Milan; director, ILAUD. Professor of urban design, Institute of
Architecture, Venice from 1955; professor of architectural composition, University of
Genoa from 1983; and visiting professor, Yale University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cornell University, and the University of California from 1966 to mid-
1970s. Fellow, Royal Institute of British Architects from 1981; honorary member,
American Academy of Arts and Sciences from 1978; honorary member from 1975,
American Institute of Architects; member, National Academy of San Luca, Rome. Royal
Gold Medal, Royal Institute of British Architects 1993.

Selected Works

Master Plan, Reggio Emilia (with Franco Albini), 1948
Spontaneous Architecture Display, Triennale, Milan, 1950
INA-Casa Apartment Buildings, Arona, Baveno, Stresa, 1951
Master Plan, Urbino, 1964
University of Dublin (competition project; incomplete; with Armando Barp), 1964
Collegio del Colle, Free University, Urbino, 1962-66; addition, 1981
Matteotti Quarter (reconstruction; incomplete), Terni, 1974
Development Plan, University of Pavia, 1975
Faculties of Jurisprudence and Education, Free University, Urbino, 1976
Development Plan, Mazzorbo, Venice, 1979
Teatro Sanzio (reconstruction), Urbino, 1979
Development Plan for the San Miniato District, Siena, 1979
Istituto Statale d’Arte, Urbino, 1982

Development Plan for the Breda District, Pistoia, 1985

Selected Publications

1965
1966; as translated by Loretta Schaeffer Guarda, 1970
1972
1992; 2nd edition, 1999
2nd edition, 1998

1999

Further Reading

De Carlo is a prolific writer, and important accounts of his work appear in books that he
authored or edited. Numerous articles are found in architectural periodicals from 1977 on
and in annual ILAUD (International Laboratory for Architecture and Urban Design)
reports. The only monograph in English is that by Benedict Zucchi.
Brunetti, Fabrizio, and Fabrizio Gesi, Florence: Alinea, 1981
De Carlo, Giancarlo, “Legitimizing Architecture: The Revolt and Frustration of the
School of Architecture,” 23, no. 1 (1972)
Mioni, Angela, and Etra Connie Occhialini (editors), Milan: Electa, 1995
Rossi, Lamberto, Milan: Mondadori, 1988
Zucchi, Benedict, | Oxford and Boston: Butterworth Architecture, 1992

DE KLERK, MICHEL 1884-1923

Architect, the Netherlands

Michel de Klerk, in collaboration with his colleagues and in his own brief, but prolific,
practice, was the creative inspiration for the Amsterdam School, a name first given to a
group of young architects advocating an Expressive modernism in the years around 1915.
Unlike other early Modern movements, the Amsterdam School was not an organized
movement. It had no manifesto, journal, or official spokesperson. Although de Klerk
wrote almost nothing, he was widely recognized as the leader of the movement through
the aesthetic and visionary examples of his competition entries, built projects, graphic
design, and furniture design.

During a brief period, corresponding to the years of his independent practice from
1911 until his death in 1923, the Amsterdam School radically changed the city’s urban
landscape. These architects, including de Klerk, J.M.van der May, Piet Kramer, and
others, contributed an architecture that expressed the personal aesthetic visions of the
architects, advanced the conditions of modernity, and contributed to an extension of
Amsterdam’s urban, architectural, and construction traditions.

Working-class housing in Amsterdam became de Klerk’s most well known and
projects. Especially important are his three housing blocks (1913-15, 1915-16, and
1917-20) in the Spaarndammerburt, a west Amsterdam working-class district, built for
the Eigen Haard (Our Hearth) housing association. The third block, (The Ship), is the
most widely recognized and has become the iconic project of the Amsterdam School. The
working-class housing for the De Daggerad (The Dawn) Association in Amsterdam
South (1919-22) in collaboration with Piet Kramer is also widely recognized.

Born in Amsterdam’s Jewish district to a family of 21 children, de Klerk grew up in
poverty after his father died in 1886. Apparently more interested in drawing than in
school, his work was accidentally discovered by the architect Eduard Cuypers, nephew of


Petrus J.H.Cuypers (1827-1921), the famous neo-Gothic architect of Amsterdam’s two
monumental 19th-century buildings, the Rijksmuseum (1876-85) and Amsterdam
Central Railway Station (1882-89). At age 14, de Klerk entered Cuypers’s office as an
apprentice in 1898 and remained until 1910 with interruptions for travel to England,
Germany, and Scandinavia after 1906. While in Cuypers’s employment, he also attended
evening school in the Architecture Department of the Industrial School of the Society for
the Working Class. Although there is little evidence recording de Klerk’s influence in
Cuypers’s office, he gained increasing responsibility, supervising the building of major
projects and preparing designs for publication in Cuypers’s journal, (The House—Old
and New). He began his independent practice in 1911, soon after his marriage to Lea
Jessurun, an administrative assistant in Cuypers’s office. Several of de Klerk’s initial
projects—the second prize entry to the Water Tower Competition (1912), his
collaborative work with the Kramer and the architect Van der May on the
Scheepvaarthuis (1912-16) and the first housing block in Spaarndammerburt (1913-
14)—became lasting inspirations for the later work of the architects of the Amsterdam
School.

De Klerk’s architectural projects occurred in two very different settings: urban and
suburban. His suburban work, influenced by a variety of vernacular and folk sources—
Dutch farmhouses, Scandinavian wood buildings, and German half-timber houses—were
joined with his inventive combination of building plan, facade and detail into designs for
picturesque cottages and villas. Few, however, were built. Exceptions are the Bileken
House (1914) in Hilversum and the Barendsen House (1923) in Aalsmeer. These are far
less fantastical, however, than the villas designed by other architects associated with the
Amsterdam School. Just as his suburban work revealed inventive combinations of
sources, his urban projects, especially his working-class housing, flowed from equally
diverse sources but were formed within the context both of Amsterdam’s urban traditions
and of the emergence of the modern city.

The clients for de Klerk’s most important urban housing were the housing
associations Eigen Haard and De Daggerad. Formed after the adoption of
the Dutch Housing Act of 1901 and Amsterdam’s adoption of the first
municipal building code in 1905, these associations not only sponsored the
construction of working-class housing but also encouraged participation
by architects to contribute to the aesthetic qualities of Amsterdam and the
living conditions of the working class. With his projects in the
Spaarndammerburt and in Amsterdam South, de Klerk provided a
counterpoint to the emerging dogma of modern housing and modern
urbanism, which culminated in the Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture
Moderne’s Athens Charter of 1932, advocating the functional city. Like
his suburban cot-

Freedom Lane Housing (Vrijheidslaan
Housing, 1921), Amsterdam, by
Michel de Klerk

© Great Buildings

tages and villas, his stylistic sources for urban housing were farreaching, including the
English Arts and Crafts, exotic motifs from the then Dutch Indonesian colonies, and other
folk traditions. However, these are extracted from their rural sources and compressed into
the traditional urban block structure of Amsterdam’s expansion plans. In contrast to
emerging conventions of modern housing and modern urbanism, he submerged repetitive
individual housing units into larger compositions of formal parts derived from his
personal interpretations of local context. Finally, he applied Amsterdam’s bricklaying
traditions to the elaborate detailing of the street wall. Rooflines, roof drains, doorways,
windows, mailboxes, and stairwells became sculptural celebrations of everyday urban life
of the street and formed the visual symbols of collective residences of the working class.
None of de Klerk’s housing projects referred even indirectly to Amsterdam’s mannerist
architectural traditions. Instead, he, along with his colleagues in the Amsterdam School,
expanded the 17th-century rings of canals and elegant merchants’ houses by building
equivalent modern symbols of working-class urban identity.

The expressionist and anticlassical stance of de Klerk’s projects explains his
disappearance from modern architectural history. Modernism found its lineage from Karl
Friedrich Shinkel’s Berlin, composed of the classical layered orders of column and beam,
to Hendrik P.Berlage’s masonry arcade and rationalistic pure skeleton building,
expressed potently in the Amsterdam Stock Exchange. De Klerk’s alternative Modern
expressionism, like Bruno Taut in Berlin, became only a footnote in the treatises of
modernism. Only since the 1980’s have de Klerk’s projects been reexamined to find the

DE STUL

De Stijl architecture offers dynamic conceptions of spatial relationships in reaction to
conventionally static, grounded architecture from the beginning of the 20th century.
Spatial innovation, based on principles developed by the De Stijl painter and writer Piet
Mondrian from the philosophical-mathematical writings of M.H.Schoenmaekers, is
clearly evident in three iconic De Stijl projects from the mid-1920s: Theo van Doesburg
and Cornelis van Eesteren’s and and Gerrit Rietveld’s Schréder House in Utrecht,
the Netherlands. These modernist touchstones represent the synthesis of ideal universal
projections of space and everyday manipulations of life embedded within art.
Architecture proved to be the ideal art form to represent De Stijl through its ability to
transform space, surface, universal ideas, particular situations, exterior, and interior.

De Stijl as a collective modernist movement remains difficult to codify. Begun as a
virtual assemblage of avant-garde artists based in the Netherlands, it was founded and
controlled by the painter, writer, and architect Theo van Doesburg (1883-1931). To
characterize De Stijl as a truly united group or school of artists and architects is to
misrepresent the vicissitudes of a movement whose members were never in the same
place at the same time. Van Doesburg, the proselytizer for De Stijl, presented it to the
world as a close-knit, avant-garde collaborative unit of like-minded individuals with
common goals.

The work of De Stijl was disseminated primarily through its periodical, published
irregularly from 1917 to 1929 and in 1932 as a memorial issue for van Doesburg. Van
Doesburg, as its editor, published art, architecture, graphic design, essays, and manifestos
for an increasingly international audience. as a collection of diverse projects coalesced
under van Doesburg in a desire to achieve international unity through “the sign of art.

The clearest way to distill De Stijl is to examine its ideas made evident in painting,
sculpture, graphic design, and, most significantly, architecture. Mondrian and van
Doesburg strove to achieve an ideal unity through projecting the tension of opposites—a
dialectical formation on its way to achieving synthesis through articulating and then
annulling issues of the individual versus the universal, nature versus spirit, particular
versus general. This was to be achieved through reform of past cultural conditions via
or new forming (Neoplasticism). Van Doesburg attempted radical change through De
Stil, derived from the international conflicts of World War I. He strove for universal
synthesis rather than Dutch nationalism, as evidenced in “Manifesto | of ‘De Stijl,’
1918,” published in Dutch, French, German, and English as “De Stijl,” “Le Styl,” “Der
Stil,” and “The Style” De Stijl set out to negate the concept of style in a universal
language through communicative art and architecture, and the concise format of the
manifesto was its primary textual vehicle. Van Doesburg contended that art (including
architecture) embodies the spiritual force of life. He scrutinized the historical
development of art as culminating “inevitably” in De Stijl as “The Style,” to synthesize
all previous styles into a homogeneous purity. His ideological construct, looking
simultaneously back into history and forward to a new art, codified polar opposites to

create beauty in tension and synthesis. His manner of carrying out this process demanded
collective work in all the arts, an ultimately unfulfilled desire.

The painter Piet Mondrian (1872-1944) was De Stijl’s spiritual leader, providing its
philosophical foundation (Neoplasticism) and language for representing pure relations of
contrasts via horizontal-vertical oppositions and utilizing the primary colors red, blue,
and yellow with the noncolors black, white, and gray. Beyond his neoplastic painting,
Mondrian projected spatial architectural compositions and created rigorous interior
designs for his own studio spaces in Paris and New York. Mondrian championed the
development of De Stijl architecture, typically praising most built and unbuilt projects.

An early, perhaps the first, De Stijl work of architecture, appearing in its magazine in
1919, was the Villa Henny in Huis ter Heide, the Netherlands, by Robert van’t Hoff
(1887-1979), designed in 1915. This often published reinforeed-concrete house was
inspired by the residential architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright, whom van’t Hoff visited
in the United States in 1914. The rectilinear, flat-roofed house features white planar
surfaces with gray bands of trim, standing aloof from its natural setting. Interior rooms
project symmetrically off a central space, a theme later transformed by van Doesburg.
Other early De Stijl projects typically involved interior alterations of existing rooms, such
as a children’s bedroom by Vilmos Huszar from 1920 and a doctor’s clinic by Gerrit
Rietveld from 1922, demonstrating a process of re-forming the past on the way to ideal
De Stijl architecture.

The formal debut of De Stijl architecture took place in 1923 under van Doesburg at
Léonce Rosenberg’s in Paris. This exhibition, displayed drawings, photographs,
and models by van Doesburg, Cornelis van Eesteren, Vilmos Huszar, Willem van
Leusden, J.J.P.Oud, Gerrit Rietveld, Jan Wils, and (surprisingly) Ludwig Mies van der
Rohe, who contributed a photograph of his 1922 Glass Skyscraper model. This grouping
of De Stijl architects (which at this time also included the Russian artist-architect E.
Lissitzky) indicates the expansive assembly of international members for the movement.
Two projects attracting great attention from critics and later widely disseminated through
publications and other exhibitions were the (Artist’s House) and the (Private House).
Both were developed by van Doesburg in collaboration with van Eesteren (1897-1988)
specifically for the Paris exhibition. The andthe to be built of “iron and glass” and
“concrete and glass,” respectively, provided literal and figurative models for future
construction. As siteless, dynamic, spatial objects, each contains asymmetrical volumes
rotated about central voids, projecting primary-colored planes as floors, walls, and
ceilings into surrounding space. Van Doesburg constructed a model of the and
photographed it from below as an object suspended in space to display its ability to
confront space and time and to expose its “sixth facade.” Van Doesburg prepared
axonometric “counter-construction” drawings for the . These drawings emphasize the
oblique relationships between pure planes and convey the abstract qualities of infinite
extension without grounding them to a fixed vanishing point as in perspective. These
axonometric constructions sought to liberate space and surface from earthly associations,
or, as van Doesburg wrote in point 10 of his manifesto “Towards Plastic Architecture,”
“This aspect, so to speak, challenges the force of gravity in nature.”

The furniture maker and architect Gerrit Rietveld (1888-1964), an early De Styl
participant who contributed a jewelry store design and assisted as a model builder for the
Paris exhibition, produced the most significant work of De Stijl architecture, the Schréder


House in Utrecht, completed in 1924. Rietveld’s initially produced without color in
1918, successfully mediated the transfer of De Stijl principles from painting to
architecture. This seemingly simple wood chair, painted in the primary colors plus black
in 1922 or 1923, is simultaneously articulated and synthetic and allows space to flow
through it uninterrupted. It, as well as the 1923 Maison Projects, inspired the De Stil
principles demonstrated in the Schréder House. This tiny two-story structure provides
rich flexibility in its contrasting relations of elements and sliding partitions, allowing for
closed or open living arrangements. As a house of options, or a cabinet to live in, it
functions pragmatically and abstractly, attached to a series of row houses and opened
wide to the surrounding environment. Although constructed primarily with traditional
timber frame and brick in-fill, it appears as an a-material, innovative, anti-box in its
exterior photographed images and its projecting pinwheel plan. Its innovatively detailed
connections and built-in furnishings emphasized the house as a total work of art. Rietveld
drifted away from his associations with van Doesburg and De Stijl after the Schréder
House but continued a long career building throughout the Netherlands by developing
architectural relationships from De Stijl.

J.J.P.Oud (1890-1963), an urban architect practicing in Rotterdam, published essays
and projects in the periodical but held a tenuous relationship to De Stil and van
Doesburg after 1921. Van Doesburg collaborated with Oud on several residential
projects, adding stained glass and painted color patterns to Oud’s architecture. Oud was
simultaneously a pragmatist and an experimenter, as evident in his Wright-inspired
Purmerend Factory project from 1919, a large industrial con crete volume nestled into an
office area with a complex shallow-space facade. As a socially minded architect for the
city of Rotterdam, he designed several expedient public housing projects there. His
Spangen Housing (1919-21) and Tusschendijken Housing (1921-24), both displayed in
the 1923 De Stijl exhibition, achieved efficiency and economy through standardization
and use of brick as an everyday exterior material while including horizontal-vertical
articulations of corner elements related to spatial De Stijl ideas. His Kiefhoek Housing
(1925-29) contained a-material primary-color elements as a type of De Stijl village. His
temporary Superintendent’s Office (1923) for Oud-Mathenesse Housing was a De Stij
folly in primary colors and cubic forms, derived from the paintings of Mondrian and van
Doesburg. Oud’s Cafe de Unie, built in Rotterdam in 1925, was bombed during World
War II and reproduced at another location in the city in 1986, signifying its architectural
stature conveyed through publications. Its facade, a billboard manifesto advertising De
Stil, displays a low-relief composition of primary colors with integrated signage.

After 1924, van Doesburg and Mondrian clashed over appropriation of the diagonal
into the rectilinear compositions characteristic of De Stijl painting. Mondrian developed
his diamond compositions, rotating the frames of his paintings 45 degrees while retaining
the horizontal-vertical relationships of the rectilinear elements themselves to emphasize
extension of the boundaries of the artwork beyond the inconsequential oblique frame.
Van Doesburg, on the other hand, began at this time to invert Mondrian’s strategy,
employing diagonal relationships of lines and planes within an orthogonal frame.
Influenced by these interrelated yet oppositional developments, van Doesburg reified
their spatial implications in two rooms of the Cafe Aubette (dawn), constructed within an
18th-century building in Strassbourg, France, between 1926 and 1928. The complex
commission was carried out in conjunction with Hans Arp and Sophie Tauber Arp, who


designed other rooms. This ultimate fusion of art and life using De Stijl ideas in
combination with off-the-shelf materials, furniture, and lighting fixtures resulted in an
ideal De Stijl forum. By re-forming the spaces of this nightclub with striking
manifestations of line and color in relation to the bodily activity of dancing and the
projection of cinema, van Doesburg temporarily accomplished De Stijl synthesis through
unity from the tension of opposites. The Small Dance Hall’s primary-color panels on the
walls and ceiling align orthographically with the rectilinear room, resulting in a clear
fusion of surface and space. Enacting van Doesburg’s transition into “elementarism” and
influenced by the oblique “counter-construction” drawings from the his Cinema-Dance
Hall features diagonal color patterns extending through the room’s corners to dismantle
the confines of the space. In the Cafe Aubette, reconstructed in 1995, the projection of
cinema and the gestures of bodies in motion establish a kinetic dialogue between art and
life. Synthesizing architecture, painting, sculpture, and applied arts as __ or total work of
art, van Doesburg created the ultimate De Stijl space and representation of modernism: a
dialectically constructed avant-garde cafe-salon interiorized as spatial art rather than
occupying rooms with art hung on the walls.

Van Doesburg built a simple house for himself and his wife, Nelly, in Meudon-Val-
Fleury, outside of Paris, between 1927 and 1930. Succumbing to tuberculosis, he died in
a sanatorium in Davos, Switzerland, in 1931. De Stijl as an avant-garde movement
unfortunately expired with van Doesburg. Subsequent developments of modernist and
contemporary architecture have been crucially reliant on the spatial conceptions of the De
Stijl architects, from the works of Le Corbusier and Marcel Breuer to Peter Eisenman,
John Hejduk, and MVRDV. De Stijl architecture engaged space and surface in a
simultaneously elemental and universal manner, proposing meaning and spirituality
within abstraction and “pure” relations of forms.

MARK STANKARD
Color; Glass Skyscraper (1920-21); Lissitzky, El (Russia); Mies van der
Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Oud, J.J.P. (Netherlands); Rietveld, Gerrit
(Netherlands); Schréder-Schrader House, Utrecht, Netherlands; van
Doesburg, Theo (Netherlands)

Further Reading

Writings on De Stijl seldom focus specifically on architecture, typically integrating
multiple aspects of De Stijl. Many more books and articles on De Stijl, Piet Mondrian,
Theo van Doesburg, Gerrit Rietveld, J.J. P.Oud, Vilmos Huszar, and other De Stijl
participants, from the time period itself to the present, are available in several languages.
Barr, Alfred H., Jr., © New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1952

Blotkamp, Carel, et al., editors, translated by Charlotte I.Loeb and Arthur L.Loeb,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
Boekraad, Cees, Flip Bool, and Herbert Henkels, editors, Delft: Delft University

Press, and Den Haag: Haags Gemeentemuseum, 1983
Bois, Yve-Alain, “The De Stijl Idea,” 70, no. 10 (November 1992)
and (Amsterdam: Athenaeum, 1968). Reprint of the periodical edited by Van
Doesburg, from 1917-1929, and 1932.


Friedman, Mildred, editor, Minneapolis, Minnesota: Walker Art Center, and New
York: Abbeville Press, 1982
Jaffé, Hans Ludwig C, Amsterdam: Meulenhoff, and London: Tiranti, 1956
Michelson, Annette, “De Stijl, Its Other Face: Abstraction and Cacaphony, or What Was
the Matter with Hegel?” 22 (Autumn 1982)
Mondrian, Piet, edited and translated by Harry Holtzman and Martin S.James,
Boston: G.K.Hall, 1986
Troy, Nancy J., | Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1983

DECONSTRUCTIVISM

Deconstructivism is a theoretical term that emerged within art, architecture, and the
philosophical literature of the late 1980s and early 1990s. The movement refers mainly to
an architectural language of displaced, distorted, angular forms, often set within
conflicting geometries. With origins in the ideas of French philosopher Jacques Derrida (
1930), deconstructivism generated an iconoclastic style of the avant-garde whose
principle architec tural exponents included Coop Himmelb(l)au, Zaha Hadid, Behnisch
and Partners, Bernard Tschumi, Peter Eisenman, Morphosis, Rem Koolhaas, Daniel
Libeskind, and Frank Gehry, among others. Curiously, while these and other architects
have continued to practice in a related formal language, the terms once used to describe
their work have long since dropped out of usage.

Deconstruction in the field of architecture owes its origins to two parallel events that
took place in 1988. One was an exhibition titled “Deconstructivist Architecture” held at
the Museum of Modern Art in New York City; the second was a conference titled
“Deconstruction in Art and Architecture” held at the Tate Gallery in London. The
different terms employed by the organizers to describe their respective events highlighted
their differing trajectories. The exhibition in New York—originally to be called “Neo-
Constructivist Architecture” with reference to a revival of the Russian stylistic movement
from the early part of the 20th century—highlighted the formal language emerging in the
work of a group of avant-garde architects, including several of those aforementioned. The
event in London, meanwhile, stressed the connection to Derridian philosophy.

Deconstruction emerged out of the poststructuralist tradition of literary theory, which,
in opposition to structuralism, stressed the slippage and fluctuation of meaning that is
always at work in the process of linguistic and cultural signification. Derrida first used
the term to refer to a mode of inquiry that sought to expose the paradoxes and value-laden
hierarchies that exist within the discourse of Western metaphysics. Although
deconstruction dismantles or analyses such concepts, it was never meant to be nihilistic,
according to Derrida. Rather, it serves as an epistemological method of engagement with
the world. Although Derrida once described the philosopher as a “would-be architect,”
always searching for secure foundations on which to construct an argument, the links
between the philosophical term and architecture are clearly metaphorical. Derrida’s sense
of the word is a method and not a style.


The connection between Deconstruction and architecture stemmed largely from
Bernard Tschumi’s use of Derrida’s ideas in his competition-winning 1983 design for the
Parc de la Vilette in Paris. Tschumi proposed a nonhierarchical grid of dispersed
pavilions instead of a more traditional building, echoing deconstruction’s own
challenging of linguistic arrangements. Later, Derrida himself collaborated with Peter
Eisenman in the design of a small section of the landscaping of the park, and he
subsequently wrote a commentary on Tschumi’s project, reading the random play of
forms as metaphors for the aleatory or contingent play of meaning in language. Derrida
significantly referred in this piece to the “architecture of architecture.” In other words, if
thinking about architecture is itself already a social construct, one might conclude that
what needs to be deconstructed are not the architectural forms themselves but rather the
theoretical assumptions that lie behind the design of those forms.

In effect, there were two competing events claiming Deconstructivism as
their own; it either referred to a purely stylistic phenomenon, or it referred
to a broad intellectual shift that encompassed not only philosophy but all
the visual arts. As Bernard Tschumi noted, “The multiple interpretations
that multiple architects [have given] to deconstruction [have become]
more multiple than deconstruction’s theory of multiple readings could
ever have hoped.”

UFA Palast: Dresden, Germany
(1998), designed by Coop
Himmelb(l)au of Austria

© Gerald Zugmann. Photo courtesy of
Coop Himmelb(Dau

The Museum of Modern Art’s exhibition might have more suitably retained the term
“Neo-Constructivism,” even if the architecture that had inspired the movement also
included the work of Suprematist architects, such as Kazimir Malevich. There is clear
evidence of a revival of interest in these forms—stripped of their social and political
connotations—within the formal experimentations during the 1980s at the Architectural
Association in London by architects such as Zaha Hadid of Iraq. Certainly, as far as many
architects were concerned, the connections with philosophy remained a side issue in what
was essentially a stylistic movement that did much to break the stranglehold of the harsh
rectilinearity of modernist architecture (derived from International Style, a movement
incidentally also spurred by the Museum of Modern Art, New York, earlier in the
century) but that nonetheless remained within the trajectory of modernism. As such, the
deconstructivist style in architecture relates to what art historian and critic Hal Foster has
termed a postmodernism of resistance, or a rupture of formal invention or a moment of
recuperation within a cyclical, historical process that leads to ever-new emergent
expressions of modernisms.

Derrida himself consistently refused to articulate what, if any, connection there was
between his work and the architecture of the same name. Meanwhile, Tschumi conceded
that although certain philosophical ideas that dismantled concepts had become
remarkable conceptual tools, they “could not address the one thing that makes the work
of architects ultimately different from the work of philosophers: materiality.” As a result,
the terms “deconstruction” and “deconstructivism” soon fell out of favor within the
architectural literature. Yet, paradoxically, at almost the same moment the architectural
language to which they referred began to enjoy popular support. With the construction, in
particular, of Gehry’s Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, this once shockingly radical and
irreverant approach to architecture emerged out of the shadows of the avant-garde to
become a mainstream architectural movement sanctioned by the public.

NEIL LEACH
Coop Himmelb(Iau (Austria); Eisenman, Peter (United States); Gehry,
Frank (United States); Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao, Spain; Hadid, Zaha
(Iraq); Koolhaas, Rem (Netherlands); Libeskind, Daniel (United States);
Morphosis (United States); Museum of Modern Art, New York City,
United States; Nouvel, Jean (France); Postmodernism; Poststructuralism;

Tschumi, Bernard (France)

Further Reading

Derrida, Jacques, “Letter to Peter Eisenman,” 12 (August 1990)

Derrida, Jacques, “Point de folie—Maintenant I’architecture,” in edited by Neil
Leach, London and New York: Routledge, 1997

Derrida, Jacques, “Why Peter Eisenman Writes Such Good Books,” in edited by

Neil Leach, London and New York: Routledge, 1997
Johnson, Philip, and Mark Wigley, Boston: Little Brown, 1988
Papadakis, Andreas, Catherine Cooke, and Andrew E. Benjamin (editors), New York:

Rizzoli, and London: Academy Editions, 1989

Wigley, Mark, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1993

DEMOLITION

Traditionally, the conclusion of building projects has drawn people together to celebrate
cultural progress. Thousands toured the Crystal Palace during and after its construction in
mid-19th-century London; in 1937, 200,000 pedestrians each paid a nickel to cross the
newly opened Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco; in 1974 the topping-out of the Sears
Tower with a special white beam signed by 12,000 workers was covered by a throng of
press.

Just as historically, and also in the name of progress, building demolition has
emphasized the symbolic role of buildings by calling attention to changes in cultural
values and temporal powers as the old is swept away in favor of the new. The destruction
of Persepolis in 331 B.C. by Alexander the Great indicated the triumph of Hellenistic
culture over the Mesopotamians; the order by Pope Julius II to condemn Constantine’s
basilica and thereby make way for a new St. Peter’s epitomized the papal desire to link
itself with an interpretation of Roman antiquity specific to Renaissance values. In both
cases, an idea of advancement lay behind the destruction. In the former, an enemy was
specifically and violently obliterated to establish the superiority of the victor; in the latter,
progress was manifest through a new architectural expression replacing one considered
outmoded. Rarely is building demolition a purely pragmatic act; at its theoretical base,
demolition is the antithesis of memorial building.

The notion of progress has taken many forms across the 20th century alone. Often
associated with the midcentury idea of clearing historic downtowns to make way for
modernist projects, such architectural improvements have also worn the dress of
classicism. Decades before the first Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne
(CIAM)-inspired demolitions, dozens of buildings were scrubbed from Philadelphia’s
17th-century grid to make room for the diagonal sweep of the Benjamin Franklin
Parkway (1909-19). The City Beautiful boulevard and its associated Beaux-Arts
buildings suggested a new decorum and civility for the modern city. Such classically
draped progress was usually carried out in small parcels compared with the urban
renewal of midcentury, when acres of urban fabric were razed.

A particularly focused and infamous example, the 1974 Urban and Rural
Systemization Law enacted under the Ceausescu regime inaugurated a period of mass
demolition in Romania. With the ultimate goal of consolidating 7,000 towns and villages
(over half of those extant in the countryside) with 500 agro-industrial centers, building
demolition became a tool in the formation of a more perfect Communist state by leveling
the differences among ethnic identities and variations between standards of living in town
and country along with the country’s architectural heritage. At least 29 towns had been
almost totally razed by the end of 1989, when the destruction came to an end with the
overthrow of Ceausescu.

Most mid-century demolition carried out under the banner of urban renewal was a
combination of social engineering and also a principle that older buildings, representing

an outmoded way of life, were simply obsolete. Displaced by the construction of malls
and the rising use of online shopping, the Sears Mail Order Center in Kansas City (1925)
was demolished in 1997, and in the following year the 23-story Hudson Department Store
(1911), the tallest department store in the country, was felled in Detroit. By indicating an
adjustment in cultural relevance, the planned demolition of these buildings illustrates the
concerns of the 1990s just as their construction revealed the values of a century ago.

More infamously, the destruction of hundreds of housing projects, starting in the
1970s, sounded the coda for one of the Modern movement’s greatest efforts, the
provision of efficient, low-cost public housing. Iconic photographs from 1972 of Pruitt-
Igoe (St. Louis, 1952-55) crumbling in a cloud of smoke are as potent symbolically of
the demise of modernism as well-known detail images of the Gallerie des Machines are
of its rise. The news coverage of such demolitions and reconstruction of mixed-income,
19th-century-style town homes on many of their sites (most ironically exemplified in
Baltimore, where new row houses replace the towers, which themselves replaced 19th-
century townhouses) illustrate the cycle of urban housing planning values in America.

The loss of particular monuments has often been a catalyst to energize groups, which
have lobbied for the protection of whole neighborhoods and districts in addition to single
buildings. Ironically, the preservationists have also been to blame for the destruction of
scores of historic industrial and vernacular buildings in their efforts to present a tidy
historical vignette. Scores of dependency buildings that sheltered the lives of slaves were
demolished at Colonial Williamsburg in the 1920s; 30 years later the creation of
Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia demanded the demolition of
significant mid-19th-century buildings; both projects used demolition to clear distasteful
mistakes of history for a sanitized image of Colonial life.

Across the 20th century, methods of demolition have differed from project to project,
depending on the particular building’s structural material, scale, environment, and
accessibility to the site. Techniques range from the simplest procedure of pulling down
by hand or with wire rope, to the use of demolition balls and pusher arm machinery, to
the planning for explosives and the use of “bursters,” steel cylinders inserted into
predrilled holes that “burst” concrete by means of either hydraulic power or gas
expansion.

As methods changed in precision and predictability they transformed the nature of
demolition from the brute, droning labor of the wrecking ball to a quick and dramatic
event that is often enhanced with the marching bands and fireworks displays once
reserved for ribbon-cutting ceremonies. Especially in the last decades of the 20th century,
as the work of demolition began to resemble entertainment, demonstrators against the
destruction of particular buildings were joined at the contested sites by growing
audiences seeking entertainment. Most famously, Controlled Demolition Incorporated
(CDI has raised the destruction of buildings to spectator sport. Between 1950 and 2000
the firm was responsible for the destruction of some 7,000 structures worldwide, often
employing the technique of implosion. This high-tech method has been coupled with
pyrotechnics and new communications technologies to draw worldwide audiences
numbering in the millions of spectators via satellite.

The captivating nature of this entertainment is shown by the inclusion of CDI’s 1994
demolition of Las Vegas’ Landmark Hotel in a movie, while still shots of other imploded
buildings were collected for calendars. For all their 20th-century popularity, these


theatrics may not find such widespread draw in the 21st. Perhaps indicating a new mood,
on the heels of the September 11 terror attacks, the implosion of the Desert Inn (Las
Vegas, October 2001) was a low-key event, carried out in the middle of the night and
without fanfare. The collapse of the World Trade Center towers, captured on film and
replayed innumerable times, has likely squelched the enthusiasm once held for this kind
of destructive entertainment.

JHENNIFER A.AMUNDSON

Athens Charter (1943); City Beautiful Movement; Congrés

Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne (CLAM, 1927-); Historic

Preservation; Pruitt-[goe Housing, St. Louis, Missouri

Further Reading

Giurescu, Dinu C., New York: World Monuments Fund, 1989
Huxtable, Ada Louise, Washington, D.C.: The Preservation Press, 1986
Nye, David E., Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1994
Pledger, David M., Lancaster: The Construction Press Ltd., 1977
http://www.controlled-demolition.com/

DENMARK

A diversity of styles was represented in Denmark at the turn of the century, from the Art
Nouveau commercial building (1907) designed by Anton Rosen for one of Copenhagen’s
main shopping streets to the Dutch Renaissance-inspired Student Union Building (1910)
by Ulrik Plesner and Aage Langeland-Matthiessen. In response to the lack of a defining
style, many architects began to search for a “national architecture” that would be based
on Danish traditions rather than on movements originating in other parts of Europe. The
first step in this direction resulted in the Abel Cathrine’s Foundation Building (1885-86)
by H.B.Storck; however, the most instrumental figure in the search for a national
architecture was Martin Nyrop. Commissioned to design the Copenhagen Town Hall
during the final decade of the 19th century, Nyrop sought to create a building that reacted
to reliance on applied Renaissance-inspired ornament that characterized many buildings
at the time and that responded to Danish material traditions and Nordic mythology via
well-integrated details. The attention to material and detail is also evident in Nyrop’s
Bispebjerg Hospital (1907-13) and in the addition to Vallekilde High School (1907-08).
Nyrop’s wish for a national architecture was shared by P.V.Jensen Klint, who was
responsible for the design of Grundtvig’s Church (1913-40), which was clearly inspired
by Danish brick traditions and the architecture of parish churches.

The debate concerning an appropriate style intensified during the first decade of the
20th century and culminated in a decisive event in 1910 precipitated by suggested
alterations to Vor Frue Church, originally designed by C.F.Hansen and constructed

between 1811 and 1829. The brewery owner Carl Jacobsen offered to donate a spire for
the church, and although many of the older generation of architects were in agreement,
Carl Petersen and a number of younger architects argued that it would destroy the church
and greatly compromise the building; ultimately, the church was fitted with a Doric tower
that was in keeping with the original neoclassical building. Carl Petersen’s allegiance to
Neoclassicism is evident in the Faaborg Museum (1912-15), which clearly
acknowledged the work of Hansen. The culmination and the demise of neoclassicism are
represented in Hack Kampmann’s Copenhagen Police Headquarters (1925). Like the
police station, Kampmann’s other work was characterized by a theatrical formalism, as
evidenced in the Arhus Theatre (1898-1900), the Customs House (1895—97) in Arhus
Harbor, and the National Library (1898-1902) in Arhus.

The transition from Neoclassicism to the Nordic adaptation of the Modern movement,
commonly referred to as functionalism, is most clearly seen in the area of housing, as
living standards and housing shortages were of political and social importance in
Denmark following World War I. One of the leaders in improving housing was
Copenhagen’s Public Housing Association (KAB), which oversaw the construction of the
Studiebyen demonstration project (1920-24) to examine alternatives for singlefamily
houses, duplexes, and row houses. Among the architects participating were Thorkild
Henningsen and Ivar Bentsen, Anton Rosen, and the influential teacher and architect Kay
Fisker. During the same period, Henningsen and Bentsen were also commissioned by the
KAB to build a series of row houses around Copenhagen that provided small back and
front gardens while maintaining the street wall that was characteristic of traditional
housing in provincial Danish towns. Large-scale housing projects undertaken at this time
were five- or six-story blocks organized around an open interior court, as seen in Povl
Baumann’s municipal housing (1919-20) at the corner of Hans Tavsensgade and
Struensgade in Copenhagen and Kay Fisker’s Hornbekhus (1922-23). The
transformation from closed housing blocks to freestanding parallel rows of flats can be
traced through Ved Classens Have (1924) by Carl Petersen, Povl Baumann, Ole
Falkentorp, and Peter Neilsen; Solgarden (1929) by Peter Hansen; and finally the
freestanding parallel blocks of housing at the Blidah Park housing estate designed by a
group of architects that included Edvard Heiberg, Karl Larsen, and Ivar Bentsen. The
complete transition to functionalism is evident in Vordroffsve] 2 (1929) and in the
Vestersohus housing complexes by Kay Fisker and C.F.Moller.

During the 1930s, two new tendencies developed, the first characterized by the
adherence to the ideals of the Modern movement with the acceptance of Danish building
traditions and form language and another that favored the aesthetic criteria of modernism.
The former tendency can be seen in the buildings at Arhus University, which were
initiated in 1931 by Fisker, Meller, and Paul Stegmann. Those architects who adhered to
the stylistic tendencies of the Modern movement included Vilhelm Lauritzen, whose
restrained formalism and elegant detailing are illustrated in the Radio Building (1937-
47), Gladsaxe Town Hall (1937), and Kastrup Airport Terminal (1939). At the end of the
1930s, Mogens Lassen, who was influenced by the ideas of Le Corbusier, constructed a
series of houses that successfully reconciled ideas imported from France and Germany
and the attention to material and detail that characterized Danish architecture.

Ame Jacobsen revealed his affinity for the aesthetic sensibilities of the Modern
movement in the Bellavista housing complex from 1934, which employs a flat roof and


brick walls rendered smooth and painted white. Like the previous generation of
architects, Jacobsen’s work was characterized by a formal simplicity and attention to
detail. These tendencies are revealed in the town halls in Arhus (1937-42), Sollerad
(1940-42, designed in association with Flemming Lassen), and Radovre (1955). In 1960,
Jacobsen completed the tallest building in Denmark up to that time, the SAS Hotel, which
was based on Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s Lever House in New York. One year later,
the commission for the new headquarters of the National Bank of Denmark (1965-78)
was awarded to Jacobsen and completed after his death by his successor firm Dissing &
Weitling.

Whereas some architects continued to work within the dictates of international
modernism during the 1940s and 1950s, others looked to the American West Coast and
Japanese architecture for inspiration. Houses by Jern Utzon, Erik Christian Serensen, and
Vilhelm Wohlert revealed a concern for the relationship between interior and exterior,
clearly expressed structure, and spatial variety using a series of standard elements. The
most notable examples of these ideas are Utzon’s Kingo Houses (1958-60) and
Fredensborg Terraces (1962-63) and Jorgen Bo and Vilhelm Wohlert’s Louisiana
Museum, a complex that has continually grown by accretion from its inception in 1958.
A number of influences are visible in Danish architecture of the 1960s,
including that of the work of Utzon, as seen in the dense, low-rise housing
projects Ved Stampedammen (1965), Carlsmindepark (1965), Atoften
(1966), and Nivaveenge (1966). Another influence that was evident at the
time was the work of the Finnish architect Alvar Aalto, who together with
Jean-Jacques Baruél had won a competition for the North Jutland Art
Museum in 1958. Aalto’s influence is evident in Paul Niepoort’s
Senderborg Church (1961) and Berglum Kollegium (1967); Jorgen Bo,
Karen Clemmensen, and Ebbe Clemmensen’s Blaagaard State Teachers
College and Enghavegard School complex (1962-66); and Baruél’s
Senderborg Business College (1964-74). Erik Christian Sorensen
continued to emphasize the importance of structural clarity and material
honesty in the First Church of Christ Scientist (1967), which revealed an
affinity for the work of the Swedish architect Sigurd Lewerentz. The work
of Lewerentz and the American architect Louis Kahn influenced the work
of Inger and Johannes Exner, especially Nerrland Church (1966-70) and
Islev Church (1967-70). The Exners

Arhus University Main Building,
Copenhagen, Denmark, designed by
C.F.Moller, Kay Fisker, and Povl
Stegmann (1942-46)

© Kevin Mitchell

went on to develop a greater personal expression in the Church of the Resurrection
(1984), Lyng Church (1994), Skering Church (1994), and an extensive restoration of
Koldinghus Castle between 1972 and 1974.

At the end of the 1960s, a number of monolithic buildings inspired by the affiliation of
architects known as Team X and their concern for adaptable structures and rough
materials appeared in Denmark, including Gehrdt Bornebusch, Max Briiel, and Jargen
Selchau’s Holbak Teachers College (1967) and Esbjerg Teachers College (1967-73) and
Friis and Moltke’s Risskov County High School (1968-69), Danish Contractors
Association School (1967-68), and Scanticon Training Center (1967-69). The most
refined building constructed in this idiom was Erik Christian Serenson’s Viking Ship
Museum (1967-68), which is supported by an elegantly proportioned, roughly formed
concrete structure.


In the 1970s, a series of notable churches were constructed in Denmark, including
Friis and Moltke’s Ellevang Church (1973-74), C.F.Maller’s Ravnsbjerg Church (1975—
76), and Johan Otto von Spreckelsen’s churches at Vangede (1974) and Stavsholt (1979—
81), both of which reveal the influence of Louis Kahn. One of the most significant
religious buildings to appear during this period was Jorn Utzon’s Bagsverd Church
(1974-76), which reflects his preoccupation with prefabricated building components and
the relationship between free expression and clear structural logic.

A number of dense, low-rise housing developments were constructed during the
1970s. One of the most notable was Fzllestegnestuen’s Flexibo housing development,
which incorporated a system of structure and light partitions that allowed residents to
adapt the location of the walls to their particular way of living. In 1978, Tegnestuen
Vandkunsten completed Tingarden 1 and 2, which was the first public housing
development in which future users were consulted during the planning stage. Along with
Fellestegnestuen, Tegnestuen Vandkunsten has been influential in housing in Denmark
with projects such as Jystrup Savveerk (1983-84), Garvergarden (1986-88), and Diana’s
Have (1991-92).

The concern for housing extended into the 1980s and 1990s, resulting in many large-
scale developments, including the Sandbakken housing development (1988-80) by
C.F.Mallers Tegnestue and the Dalgas Have development (1989-91) by Henning Larsens
Tegnestue. Larsen has made significant contributions to Danish architecture in the latter
half of the 20th century, beginning with the Glostrup Chapel and Crematorium (1960)
and the Vangebo and Saint Jorgens elementary schools (1960), designed in association
with Gehrdt Bornebusch, Max Briiel, and Jorgen Selchau. Like many other Danish
architects during this period, including Nielsen, Nielsen, and Nielsen (Holstebro
Congress and Cultural Center, 1990-91; Vingsted Center, 1993), Larsen’s work is
characterized by experimentation in a range of styles and the search for an appropriate
expression, from the postmodern buildings at Dalgas Have to the neomodernist BT
Building (1993-94) in Copenhagen.

The search for an appropriate expression and a defining style is evident in the new
urban quarters that have been constructed to provide housing and services. The new
neighborhood surrounding the Heje Taastrup station (1985-present) takes inspiration
from the work of Leon Kreir and employs traditional town-planning principles in an
attempt to provide an overall framework for development. Two major housing
exhibitions that resulted in new suburban centers, Blangstedgérd (1987-88) and
Egebjerggard (1985-96), resulted in a range of individual structures that vary in quality
and bear little relation to each other or to the overall development plans.

Buildings that resulted from competitions during the late 1980s and early 1990s also
reveal the lack of a defining style that is characteristic of recent Danish architecture. In
1988, a competition was held for a new Museum of Modern Art to be built south of
Copenhagen. Completed in 1996 by Seren Robert Lund, this building is one of the few in
Denmark that appears to have been influenced by the briefly fashionable
deconstructivism. Two recent additions to major buildings in Copenhagen have resulted
from competitions in the 1990s: the Royal Library (1993-99) by Schmidt, Hammer, and
Lassen and the National Gallery (1998) by C.F.Mellers Tegnestue. Both of these
additions illustrate a current tendency to create buildings appearing as freestanding
objects that bear little relation to the immediate context.


Whereas some architects have aggressively experimented with a range of styles
imported from abroad, others have quietly worked to develop an architecture devoid of
superficial effects. Of particular note are the summer cottage (1985-87) on the island of
Leese, the Holstebro Art Museum (1981, addition 1991) by Hanne Kjerholm, and the
work of the firm Fogh and Felner, including the Bornholm Art Museum (1993), Egedal
Church (1990), and Tornbjerg Church (1994). Perhaps the most significant contributions
to the development of an architecture sympathetic to material and context have come
from Gerhdt Bornebusch, as evident in the Danish School of Forestry (1981-92) in
Nedebo, the extension and renovation of the National Museum (1990-92), and the
Danish Forest and Landscape Institute (1995).

Although 20th-century Danish architecture has been subject to influences from a
variety of countries, very few foreign architects have built in Denmark. It is interesting to
note that two major exceptions were both from Finnish architects: Alvar Aalto’s North
Jutland Art Museum and Heikkinen and Komonen’s European Film College (1992-93).
However, Danish architects established an impressive record of obtaining significant
commissions abroad during the latter half of the century, including Utzon’s Sydney
Opera House (1956-73) and National Assembly Building (1971-83) in Kuwait, Arne
Jacobsen’s St. Catherine’s College (1962) at Oxford, Henning Larsen’s Ministry of
Foreign Affairs (1980-84) in Riyadh, and Johan Otto von Spreckelsen’s Le Grande Arch

(1982-90) in Paris,
KEVIN MITCHELL

Further Reading

A comprehensive account of 20th-century architecture in Denmark has yet to be
published in English; the most up-to-date works remains Faber (1963) and Faber (1968).
For information on individual architects, see Drew, Faber (1964), Faber (1991),
Jorgensen, and Solaguren-Beascoa de Corral.

Drew, Philip (editor), London: Phaidon Press, 1995
Faber, Tobias, Copenhagen: Det Danske Selskab, 1963; as translated by Frederic
R.Stevenson, Copenhagen: Det Danske Selskab, 1978
Faber, Tobias, Stuttgart, Germany: Verlag Gerd Hatje, London: Tiranti, and New York:
Praeger, 1964
Faber, Tobias, | New York: Praeger, and London: Architectural Press, 1968
Faber, Tobias, Berlin: Ernst and Sohn, 1991
Fisker, Kay, and Francis R.Yerbury (editors), | London: Benn, and New York:
Scribner, 1927
Jergensen, Lisbet Balslev, Jorgen Sestoft, and Morten Lund, s.L.: Bergiafonden and
Aristo, 1994; as translated by Martha Gaber Abrahamsen, s.l.: Bergiafonden and
Aristo, 1994
Lind, Olaf, Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag, 1996
Meller, Erik, Jens Lindhe, and Kjeld Vindum, Copenhagen: Danish Architectural
Press, 1991
Norberg-Schulz, Christian, and Tobias Faber (editors), Copenhagen: Arkitektens
Forlag, 1996

Skriver, Poul Erik (editor), | Copenhagen: Dansk-Norsk Foundation, 1966; as
translated by David Hohnen, Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag, 1969
Solaguren-Beascoa de Corral, Félix, Barcelona: Gili, 1989
Utzon, Jarn, edited by Yukio Futagawa, Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita, 1980
Utzon, Jorn, edited by Yukio Futagawa, Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita, 1981
Woodward, Christopher, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1998

DEPARTMENT STORE

The department store is so named for its administrative organization, which combines
centralized marketing, customer service, deliveries, and accounting with separately
managed departments for each type of stock, staffed by specialized buyers and sales
personnel responsible for the unit’s profitability (Clausen, 1985). An index of emerging
monopoly capitalism in the second half of the 19th century, these large-scale retail
enterprises initially grew because of innovative sales practices, such as fixed pricing, free
access to goods, low markups, and liberal rights of return and exchange. Higher sales, in
turn, yielded volume discounts and prompted increased diversification. Urbanization and
population mobility, facilitated by public transportation, were instrumental in their
growth from a single storefront into vast premises occupying an entire city block. So
significant was their effect on the urban fabric that the construction of a new department
store might signal both the demise of smaller establishments and the relocation of entire
shopping districts.

Often opulent in their appointments, these emporia democratized luxury and opened
new avenues of consumption for an upwardly mobile middle class seeking the status of
high fashion at bargain-basement prices. In particular, large stores offered a protected
setting for women shoppers, whose circumscribed lives nevertheless included the
management of household accounts. Attending them were women assistants, whose
consciousness of their requirements and lower wages than their male counterparts spelled
increased profit margins for the retailer. In effect, the department store was one stage on
which some of the major societal changes of the period were enacted (Benson, 1986).

Its built forms typically consist of large, open floors sustained on metal framing: in
Europe, design is based on the tradition of the shopping arcade, in North America, on that
of the wholesale warehouse. Large areas of plate glass, together with skylights, brought
natural light into the interior to facilitate inspection of goods. Display windows lined the
sidewalks, and commodious entrance portals ushered in the passersby. So successful
were these stores at promoting consumption that writers of the day described them as
“cathedrals of commerce” or “museums of merchandise.” The professional expertise
formerly lavished only on important public monuments now forged these tangible
symbols of Gilded Age secularization (Clausen, 1987).

Elite architectural designs were emblems of corporate identity for retailers competing
in an international market. The range of goods was comparable to that of any world’s fair
exhibition hall. Aristide Boucicaut’s palatial Bon Marche of 1869-87 was the first
Parisian precedent, its conventional exterior concealing an iron frame that carried


massive floor loads. Ecole-trained Jean-Alexandre Laplanche ornamented the iron
technology of Louis Auguste Boileau, a pairing duplicated in the second phase by the
design of Boileau’s son Louis Charles and the framing of engineer Gustave Eiffel.
Among the stores that followed were the chic Au Printemps of 1881 by Paul Sedille and
the more populist Grands Magasins de la Samaritaine of 1905 by Frantz Jourdain, a
colorful Art Nouveau confection of frankly revealed steel and glass (Clausen, 1987).

In North America, A.T.Stewart’s Marble Palace of 1848 in New York and its cast-iron
successor of 1859-62 designed by John Kellum established the Renaissance as the
vocabulary of choice well into the 20th century for such legendary retail giants as
Macy’s, Gimbels, and Marshall Field’s of Chicago. Refined by James MacLaughlin in
the John Shillito store of 1877-78 in Cincinnati and by William Le Baron Jenney, whose
designs for Chicago’s first and second Leiter stores of 1878-79 and 1889, respectively,
marked the emergence of the curtain wall, the retail reached its finest culmination in the
grid of horizontals and verticals that Louis Sullivan conceived for the Schlesinger-Mayer
store (later the Carson Pirie Scott store) of 1899-1904, also in Chicago (Harris, 1987).

Twentieth-century examples were equally varied. Alfred Messel concealed the metal
frame of Berlin’s Wertheim department store of 1896-1904 beneath historicizing
facades, notwithstanding an 1820s proposal by his countryman Karl Frederick Schinkel
for shop fronts with large panes of glass between masonry piers. Similarly, Gordon
Selfridge’s London department store of 1910, on which Graham, Burnham, and Company
of Chicago served as consultants, led the British vogue for Beaux-Arts design, a
precedent also adopted by the Hudson’s Bay Company for its flagship stores in western
Canada. By contrast, Victor Horta’s now demolished Grands Magasins a |’ Innovation of
1901 in Brussels frankly expressed a metal-and-glass facade beneath an arc of granite. In
the Far East, meanwhile, the Renaissance was the choice for China’s Sincere, Wing On,
and Wangfujing department stores and for Japan’s Mitsukoshi (MacPherson, 1998).

The 1920s brought a revolution in department store design, as Erich Mendelsohn of
Germany and William Marius Dudok of the Netherlands adopted the steel and glass of
International modernism. Mendelsohn’s Stuttgart (1926-28) and Chemmitz (1928-30)
Schocken stores and his 1927 Petersdorff store in Breslau, as well as Dudok’s now
demolished Bijenkorf store of 1929-30 in Rotterdam, defined a new aesthetic that fused
Bauhaus purity with curvilinear expressionism. A similar idiom was introduced in 1938
in London with the Peter Jones department store by William Crabtree, Slater and
Moberley, and C.H. Reilly.

Within a decade, the private car had transformed the North American city. In Los
Angeles, Bullocks Wilshire of 1929 by John and Donald Parkman acknowledged this
reality with an innovative Art Deco design in a suburban location fronting on a parking
lot. Ten years later, a streamlined fortress of reinforced concrete and glass block was
adopted by its competitor, Coulter’s-Wilshire, heralding the advent of the blank facade
adopted at the same period by the chain of Sears and Roebuck and later to become the
norm for all suburban department stores from the 1960s on. From individual branch
stores in the suburbs, the department stores became chains that anchored regional
shopping centers, such as Seattle’s Northgate of 1950 (Clausen, 1984). Downtown stores
in the United States declined until the renaissance of the 1970s reintroduced them into
multiuse complexes, such as the Broadway Plaza of 1974 in Los Angeles. Other solutions
included the Toronto Eaton Centre of 1974-77 by Zeidler Roberts Partnership, a private


galleria of smaller specialty shops built for a major retailer, to draw pedestrian traffic
from adjoining city streets. Likewise, in the mid-1980s, Nichii Obahiro of Japan
proposed a vast climatecontrolled garden to attract customers confined by the rigors of a
harsh winter. As the department store became but another contour of the shopping mall,
its most distinctive contemporary residue was found in the prophetically ruinous facades
that SITE conceived in the 1970s for the now vacant catalog showrooms of Best

Products.
ANGELA K.CARR
Further Reading
Benson, Susan Porter, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986

Clausen, Meredith L., “Northgate Regional Shopping Center—Paradigm from the
Provinces,” 43 (May 1984)
Clausen, Meredith L., “The Department Store—Development of the Type” 39/1

(1985)

Clausen, Meredith L., Leiden: E.J.Brill, 1987

Clausen, Meredith L., “Department Stores,” and “Shopping Centers,” in 4 vols.,
edited by Joseph Wilkes, New York: Wiley, 1989

Harris, Neil, “Shopping—Chicago Style,” in edited by John Zukowsky, Munich:

Prestel, and Chicago: Art Institute of Chicago, 1987
Harris, Neil, “The City That Shops: Chicago’s Retailing Landscape,” in edited

by John Zukowsky, Munich: Prestel, and Chicago: Art Institute of Chicago, 1993
Lancaster, William, London: Leicester University Press, 1995
Leach, William, New York: Pantheon Books, 1993

MacPherson, Kerrie L. (editor), | Richmond, Surrey: Curzon, and Honolulu: University
of Hawaii Press, 1998
Pevsner, Nikolaus, | Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1976

DEUTSCHER WERKBUND

Recognized as a distinct group on the occasion of the Third German Exhibition of
Applied Art in Dresden in 1906, the Deutscher Werkbund (German Arts and Crafts
Society) was an association of artists, architects, industrialists, and merchants contending
with the revolutionary changes in the economic, social, and cultural fabric of 19th-
century Europe and America. Founders of the Werkbund included Berlin architect
Hermann Muthesius; Friedrich Naumann, author and (Director of Work) for the Berlin
“industrial combine” Allgemeine Elektricitats Gesellschaft (AEG); and Karl Schmidt,
director of the Dresdner Werkstatten fiir Handwerkskunst (Dresden Workshop for
Manual Art). Muthestus and Naumann authored two books that provided much of the
Werkbund’s platform: Muthesius’s (1904; The English House), a critical overview of

what he perceived as an ideal model for a native craft culture, and Naumann’s (1906;
Art in the Epoch of the Machine), a treatise on the role of craft and industrial production.
Initial membership of the Werkbund included 12 architects and 12 industrial firms.
Architects included such important figures as Peter Behrens, Theodor Fischer, Josef
Hoffmann, J.M.Olbrich, Bruno Paul, and Paul Schultze-Naumburg; associated firms
included both associations and traditional firms, such as Peter Bruckmann and Séhne,
Kunstdruckerei Kunstlerbund Karlsruhe, and the Wiener Werkstatte. Yet the Deutscher
Werkbund was not only a recognized organization but also a coalescence of myriad
points of view into a movement—a movement that continues to resonate across the full
array of contemporary design disciplines.

With the industrial revolution, the traditional roles of art and architecture—modes of
cultural production that had been heretofore understood as institutionalized extensions of
state and economic power—were increasingly called into question. Gottfried Semper, a
19th-century Dresden architect, teacher, and political exile, wrote two books on the
influence of sociopolitical conditions on style that were to become seminal works for
members of the Deutscher Werkbund: (1852; Science, Industry and Art), a treatise
examining industrial production and mass consumption on the entire field of applied art
and architecture, and (1860-63; Style in Industrial and Structural Arts or
Practical Aesthetics). Coupled with contemporary scientific, economic, and industrial
developments, Semper’s writings—publications that were themselves influenced by
anthropology and the natural sciences—provided much of the impetus for a rethinking
the role of art and architecture in modern German society during the 19th and 20th
centuries. Accordingly, members of the Deutscher Werkbund recognized that the shifting
attitudes toward the arts and crafts were not merely based on stylistic motivations but
were the result of a more generalized critique of cultural production and its place within
society. Thus, individuals associated with the Werkbund recognized the social
responsibility of the artist and architect. This led to the Werkbund’s acknowledgment (in
the footsteps of 19th-century English theorists Augustus Welby Pugin, William Morris,
and John Ruskin) of the significance, indeed power, of a coherent, exemplary range of
industrial and consumer products on the world stage.

Germany (a loose federation of duchies and nation-states until 1866) had long suffered
from the perception that its art and architecture exposed a general ignorance of tasteful
“culture.” Although Germany was traditionally recognized for the manufacture of
efficient, practical, and cost-effective goods and products (most notably its instruments of
war), these products were usually criticized—often rightfully—as being of inferior design
quality. The Werkbund sought to correct this perception, if not reality, by seeking to
broadly inculcate a seamless marriage between economy, form, and artistic taste. This
new vision—as a practice and an idea—was referred to by the term a word that
translates literally as “functional art.” As a new approach to design, the application of
principles derived from would better not only consumer products for use by the
Germans themselves but also competitive products for export purposes. In promoting the
nation’s manufactured goods, the Werkbund also sought to articulate a fundamental
revision of the nation’s (culture). Germany was to be perceived no longer as a
militarist—if efficient—nation devoid of the cultural élan of the rest of Europe but as a
participating, sophisticated equal on the world stage. Thus, the strength, wealth, and spirit
(in accordance with Semper, among others) was implicitly, if not explicitly, rendered by


the products that it produced. (It should be noted that this faith in domestic products was
not specific to Germany but exemplified a more general trend throughout Europe and the
Americas whereby capitalist economic models for industrial production and economic
development were increasingly seen as extensions of national culture.)

In the 1910s, Walter Gropius, who, with fellow German architect Adolf Meyer,
advanced some of the newer techniques and materials in their architectural work of the
period, expressed the need for Germany’s advance of the arts and architecture as key to
its general economic development. In so doing, Gropius also extended the Werkbund’s
vision of a vernacular aesthetic bearing the true spirit of German “Compared to other
European countries, Germany has a clear lead in the aesthetics of factory building.”
Stating that America was the “motherland of industry,” Gropius pointed to the industrial
architecture of the Americas, “whose majesty outdoes even the best German work of this
order. The grain silos of Canada and South America, the coal bunkers of the leading
railroads and the newest work halls of the North American industrial trusts, can bear
comparison, in their overwhelming monumental power, with the buildings of ancient
Egypt.” These “humane and aesthetic sensibilities” (Banham, 1980, 80) were not
completely in line with all members of the Werkbund, in particular Hermann Muthesius,
the architect who would become the de facto spokesman of the Deutscher Werkbund for
a period of time, setting the stage for the Werkbund’s internal divisions.

Documents and activities of the Werkbund serve to chronicle the emergence and
subsequent development of the organization’s approach to the allied arts and architecture,
including the inherent conflicts of the Werkbund’s position. In 1907, Muthesius
published his “Aims of the Werkbund” on behalf of the society. His earlier reports on
British domestic architecture (1904-07), showcasing the advances of the English Arts
and Crafts movement for his German audience, along with his advo cacy of engineering
and standardization in projects such as the Eiffel Tower, station halls, and bicycle wheels,
had already lent Muthesius notoriety, if not credibility, among his peers. In “Aims of the
Werkbund,” Muthesius proposes what may be regarded as a “call to arms” for artists,
architects, and their associates, an argument that he supports with the suggestion that
cultural production has not enjoined the revolutionary changes of the day and that it is not
only the social but also the spiritual responsibility of his compatriots to embrace change.
Indeed, Muthesius not only emphasized the material and technical problems confronted
by his contemporaries but also heralded a “spiritual purpose” for the arts and architecture,
a purpose that extended to the economy as a whole—what Frederic Schwarz (1996)
refers to as the pursuit of a “spiritualized economy” (75). Accordingly, architectural
culture “remains the true index of a nation’s culture as a whole...without a total respect
for form, culture is unthinkable, and formlessness is synonymous with lack of culture.
Form is a higher spiritual need” (Conrads, 27). In addition, Muthesius saw his project for
the arts and architecture as a logical expression of Germany’s vocation, a nation that
enjoyed, according to Muthesius, its “reputation for the most strict and exact organisation
in her businesses, heavy industry, and state institutions of any country in the world.” For
Muthesius, the will to “pure Form” (elaborated as the synthesis of form and function)
was an extension of the nation’s “military discipline” and, consequently, a manifestation
ofits (inner being).

Seeking to counter Muthesius’ arguments in “Aims of the Werkbund,” the Belgian
architect Henry van de Velde joined Muthesius in propounding what became the


internally contradictory document “Werkbund Theses and Antitheses”—irreconcilable
differences that both architects expressed publicly during the proceedings of the
Werkbund Congress of 1914. Whereas Muthesius proclaimed “concentration and
standardization as the aims of Werkbund design” (a statement implicitly supporting the
collective project of the design arts, including architecture), his colleague, van de Velde,
defined the essential nature of the argument as a struggle between two opposing ideals:
“Type versus Individuality.” Although it is true that van de Velde was espousing what
was already a rear-guard position by suggesting that artists are first and foremost
“creative individualists,” the argument did not end with the imminent success of a
standardized economy. Dispensing with any attempt at dialectical fusion, both architects
wrote several axioms supporting their stances regarding standardization and creative
freedom. Presented on the occasion of the first great exhibition of the Deutscher
Werkbund in Cologne in July 1914, the document, coupled with the ideologically diverse
designs for the exhibition (as in Peter Behrens’s Neoclassicism versus Gropius and
Meyer’s model office building and factory, Faguswerk), continued to affect discussions
surrounding cultural production and arts and design education well into the future. It
should be noted, however, that both Muthesius and van de Velde maintained a belief in
the spiritual nature of cultural production, but Muthestus sought a universal set of values,
reflected by a dominance of “good taste.” It is also significant that Gropius, founder of
the Staatliches Bauhaus Weimar in 1919—a program that, not incidentally, was housed in
the building where van de Velde had directed his own state-funded School of Arts and
Crafts—partook in the discussions surrounding the aims and directions of the Werkbund.
These same ideological differences would have a bearing on the formulation and
development of Gropius’s Bauhaus pedagogical programs as well.

The Deutscher Werkbund Austellung (Exhibition) of 1927 in Stuttgart, also referred to
as the Weissenhofsiedlung Stuttgart, exhibited built prototypes of experimental housing.
The exhibit, including houses and apartments designed by an international array of
architects (Le Corbusier, Mart Stam, J.J.P.Oud, Mies van der Rohe, Hans Scharoun, and
Gropius, among others), represented the maturity of the Werkbund’s vision. The 1927
exhibition underlined the transition of the Deutscher Werkbund from an organization to a
movement, a movement no longer confined to Germany but international in scope.

ELIZABETH GAMARD
AEG Turbine Factory, Berlin; Arts and Crafts Movement; Bauhaus;
Bauhaus, Dessau; Behrens, Peter (Germany); Fagus Werk, Alfeld,
Germany; Gropius, Walter (Germany); Muthesius, Hermann (Germany);
van de Velde, Henri (Belgium); Weissenhofsiedlung, Deutscher

Werkbund, Stuttgart (1927)

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, “Germany: Industry and the Werkbund,” and “The Factory Aesthetic”
in by Banham, London: Architectural Press, and New York: Praeger, 1960; 2nd
edition, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1980

Burckhardt, Lucius (editor), translated by Pearl Sanders, Woodbury, New York:
Barron’s, 1980; as translated by Pearl Sanders, London: The Design Council,
1980
Frampton, Kenneth, “The Deutsche Werkbund: 1898-1927” in by Frampton,
London: Thames and Hudson, and New York: Oxford University Press, 1980; 3rd
edition, London: Thames and Hudson, 1997

(exhib. cat.), Berlin: Akademie der Kunste, 1977

Kirsch, Karin and Gerhard Kirsch, Stuttgart, Germany: Deutsche Verlags-
Anstalt, 1987; as translated by Michael Knight, New York: Rizzoli, 1994
Lane, Barbara Miller, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1968

DHAKA, BANGLADESH

Dhaka (spelled as Dacca until 1983), the capital of Bangladesh, with a 1999 population of
9.3 million in an area of 1,528 square kilometers, is one of the densest cities of the world.
Situated in the deltaic plain of Bengal, in the midst of a maze of rivers and canals, it is the
last big urban stop on the great Gangetic stream as it cascades into the sea. The name
Dhaka has often been used synonymously, and rather incorrectly, with Louis Kahn’s
Capital Complex project that forms only a precinct—a significant one—in this
burgeoning metropolis.

The literal meaning of the name Dhaka is “concealed.” The enigmatic name might
have originated from the “dhak” trees that are presumed to have been common in the area
or the renowned 16th-century Dhakeswari Temple. Dhaka went through waves of decay
and growth, from sporadic settlements datable to 10th century AD to a Mughal provincial
capital in the 17th century and a deteriorated condition in the 18th c. until its
consolidation as a thriving city in late 19th century The strategic location of Dhaka in the
fertile and riverine land-mass of Bengal, once known for the fabled fabric muslin, and
later for the world’s largest jute production, made it the prime city in the region. As the
capital city of Bangladesh, Dhaka is now an administrative, educational, commercial, and
industrial center that includes the highest concentration of export-oriented garment
industries.

Like similar cities undergoing rapid transformations, Dhaka is also a city of social,
economic, and developmental contrasts. Despite bearing the typical afflictions of so-
called developing cities (overpopulation, pollution, traffic problems, housing crisis, etc.),
Dhaka is the center of an exuberant Bengali culture expressed in its literary and artistic
life and various urban rituals and festivities.

Once located on the northern banks of the river Buriganga, Dhaka has grown largely
toward the north, being delimited on all other sides by rivers and mostly fertile
agricultural land subject to heavy flood. The extent of greater Dhaka now comprises the
river port of Naryanganj in the south and the industrial town of Tongi and Gazipur on the
north. Although most of Dhaka city is still on a higher level, population increase in recent
times has driven people to build on the low-lying flood-prone areas.

The city is now constituted of roughly five distinct urban morphologies: (1) the so-
called old city, the original settlement that grew along the river Buriganga and later
developed into a thriving Mughal city, with its jostling mixed-use buildings, narrow,
winding streets, and legendary neighborhood traditions; (2) the so-called colonial part,
the site of new governmental, cultural, institutional, and residential buildings, especially
around the Ramna area in a bungalow and garden typology; (3) post-1947 developments
of a mixture of regulated and planned residential areas, and sporadic commercial and
institutional pockets; and (4) vast amorphous areas of semi- and unplanned growth, often
with inadequate infrastructure, symptomatic of planning incapacity in addressing
demographic and economic pressures. The fifth morphology is that of the exclusive
National Capital Complex, better known as Sherebanglanagar that represents Kahn’s
vision of a government and civic complex.
The unassuming status of Dhaka belies its substantial role in the history of the Indian
subcontinent. Historically, Dhaka has experienced paradoxical political orientation: On
the one hand, it was the base of a Muslim ideology that led to the formation of Pakistan,
and on the other hand, it was home to a Bengali nationalism that eventually led to the
breakup of Pakistan and the formation of Bangladesh.

A strong Muslim culture was established with the consolidation of Mughal
rule over Bengal in 1596, making it the eastern edge of a vast empire ruled
from Delhi and Agra. For the nearly 150 years that Bengal was a Mughal
province, the capital vacillated between Dhaka, Rajmahal, and
Murshidabad, and with that fluctuated the economic and cultural spirit of
the city. Dhaka went into a slow decline when it finally lost its capital
status in 1704, as the Mughal administration left town with all its pomp
and resources. The slump was deepened when the

Bangladesh College of Arts and Crafts
(1956), designed by Muzharul Islam

© Aga Khan Trust for Culture

English wrested control of Bengal (1757) and established Calcutta as the base of their
trading outfit. The economy of Dhaka was particularly hurt when its legendary
production was literally destroyed by English trade and tax machinations. Population
would decrease drastically (from 450,000 in 1765 to 69,000 in 1838), and buildings
would be overrun by vegetation. Dhaka would not gain a new momentum until the
beginning of the 20th century under different English policies.

Since the 19th century Dhaka and Calcutta have played out a sort of tale of two cities
in the history and psyche of modern Bengal. As Dhaka came to be seen, and in some
ways projected itself, as the bearer of a Muslim culture, Calcutta became, despite or
because of a stronger English presence, a Hindu-dominant city. The partition of Bengal
into two provinces in 1905 that established Dhaka as the capital of East Bengal, again
annulled in 1911, triggered a nationalist uprising that was to be a basis of the Indian
independence movement. It was in Dhaka that the Muslim League took root as a political
party in 1906 whose leadership was eventually to go to the Bombay-based M.A. Jinnah in
the articulation of a separate state for Muslims. That political program was realized in the
partitioning of India and the formation of Pakistan in 1947. Pakistan was to be constituted
of two provinces, separated physically by India, where Dhaka became the capital of the
eastern province. The argument for a Capital Complex in Dhaka came up as a result of
this improbable condition when the government decided to transfer the parliamentary
business between the central capital in Islamabad in West Pakistan (designed as a brand-
new city by Doxiadis) and Dhaka (where a “Second Capital” was to be built). The defeat
of the Pakistan Army in Dhaka during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971
represented the ascendance of a Bengali nationalist ideology and the establishment of the
city as the capital of an independent country.

Dhaka has been described variously as “the city of mosques,” with every conceivable
neighborhood hosting a structure or two, and the city with “ba-anno bazaar, tepanno goli”
(52 bazaars and 53 alleys), referring to the intricate network of winding streets forming
the fabric of the old city. Although the profusion of mosques bespeak of a predominant
Muslim culture since the Mughal era, there are 8th-century Buddhist ruins in the Savar
area and various Hindu structures, including the well-known |6th-century Dhakeswari
Temple.

Although Mughal building activity focused primarily on forts, (special dwellings),
and mosques, residential neighborhoods of that time established morphology of dense,
cellular buildings and courtyards along commercially active streets, traces of which can
still be seen in parts of the old city (such as Shakhari Bazar, Islampur). Buildings of the
colonial era were devoted mostly to administrative and institutional types that shifted
stylistically between European neoclassical and quasi-Mughal modes. The typology of
the bungalow in a garden setting became established at that time as a mode of urban
dwelling that is followed even today in planning strategies despite the densification of the
city.

Modern architecture was introduced in the city by two buildings that received
immediate iconic status when they were built in 1954-56: The Bangladesh College of
Arts and Crafts and the Public Library (presently Dhaka University Library), both
designed by Muzharul Islam. These and other distinctive buildings, including the Science
Laboratories (1959), N.LP.A. Building (1969), buildings for Jahangirnagar University
(1969), the National Archives (1979), and dozens of residences, established an


international reputation of Muzharul Islam as a committed architect attempting to
reconcile modernity with place and climate. A few foreign architects also contributed
toward the process of establishing a modern architectural paradigm for Dhaka in such
projects as the Kamlapur Railway Station by the American architect Robert Bouighy
(1961), the Teachers-Students Center at Dhaka University by the Greek architect-planner
Constantin Doxiadis (1963), and of course, the Parliament complex by Louis Kahn
(1963-84). Architects of later generations have pursued diverse interests, exemplified in
such notable projects as the Savar Monument by Mainul Hossain (1976), 8.0.8. Youth
Village by Raziul Ahsan (1984), housing complexes by Bashirul Haq and by Uttam Saha,
and the Liberation Monument by Urbana Architects (2000). Although thoughtful and
creative architectural work prevails in Dhaka, the city has seen very few compelling
models of large-scale urban development.

The monumental and epochal architecture of Kahn’s Capital Complex that put Dhaka
on the international architectural map is a 1,000-acre site devoted to the parliament
complex, government offices and residences, and a host of institutional buildings. The
Parliament Building, the crown of the Complex, along with adjoining brick buildings
presented a stunningly new and yet mythopoeic vocabulary for the city and the region. At
the same time, the buildings in an environment of lakes, parks, gardens, and orchards
offered a vision of a deltaic urban composition. It is perhaps poignant that when the city
has moved away, both physically and strategically, from its deltaic roots the Capital
Complex curiously evokes that condition.

KAZI K.ASHRAF
Islam, Muzharul (Bangladesh); Kahn, Louis (United States); Mosque;

National Assembly Building, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka

Further Reading

Ahmed, Sharif Uddin, London: Curzon Press, and Riverdale, Maryland: Riverdale,
1986
Ahmed, Sharif Uddin (editor), | Dhaka: Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, 1991
Bradley-Birt, F.B., London: Smith Elder, 1906; reprint, Delhi: Metropolitan Book,

1975
Islam, Nazrul, Dhaka, Bangladesh: University of Dhaka Press, 1996
Siddiqui, Kamal, et al., Dhaka, Bangladesh: University of Dhaka Press, 1990

DIENER AND DIENER

Architecture firm, Switzerland

The practice of Diener and Diener was formed as it exists now in 1975, when the son,
Roger Diener (1950-), joined his father, Marcus Diener, in the elder’s 30-year-old
practice in Basel, Switzerland. From 1978 until 1984, the younger Diener collaborated

primarily with Wolfgang Schett and Dieter Righetti, who already worked in Marcus’s
practice. Other key members of the Diener and Diener design team included Jens Erb and
Andreas Ruedi; both joined the firm in 1983 and have remained perhaps the most
influential members of the group. Roger Diener has taught at the ETH (Eidendssiche
Technische Hochschule Zurich) Lausanne and at Harvard University’s Graduate School
of Design.

Diener and Diener are best known for their large residential complexes and housing
plans, which are most recognizable by their simple features and severe facades. The firm
has also won a number of town-planning commissions. Their designs are sophisticated
and functionalist, adhering to the most positive traits of the modern philosophy while
using the most unpretentious methods and materials possible.

When Diener and Diener first began designing large-scale apartment complexes in the
late 1970s, postmodernism was at its height in Europe. The team wisely steered clear of
these stylistic leanings and made their own mark with simplicity as their goal. The team’s
modern vocabulary, attention to function, and commitment to a variety of materials and
construction methods set the firm apart. Their trademark materials have remained stone
and colored concrete. The firm interprets the culture and history of Basel through many
of their buildings, either via the facade and its conscious relationship to the urban design
and street or in their pedestrian choices of materials. Diener and Diener employ design
methods such as gridded mullions and lourves, and that often reappear throughout a range
of different types of buildings, from office buildings to apartments.

The Hammerstrasse Apartment Complex (1981) in Basel exemplifies the firm’s design
preferences. Diener and Diener’s challenge was to sensitively link the 19th-century urban
plan to the new housing complex. The firm’s design is an analogous display of a
traditional peripheral apartment block of the late 19th century, where residences face the
street, and communal space and walkways abound behind a row of studios. Apartments
open up to the rear courtyard through large windows. Smaller apartments of different
designs are intended for singles and the elderly, and larger units are intended for small
families or communal living situations. Floor plans are of the utmost importance. The
appeal to external variety is answered in the many different facings, ranging from
corrugated aluminum to green glass and painted concrete. In many of the firm’s
residential buildings, windows will span nearly the entire wall to allow for light and a
sense of space without encroaching on the proportions of the room.

Because most of their commissions are communal in nature—offices or housing
estates—Diener and Diener developed early on a sensitivity to the role of the individual
within the society. Naturally, they questioned the differences between the individual and
the collective and how to express this in built form. They developed interrelationships
between the city center and residential neighborhoods, neighborhood streets and
courtyards of houses, and this space and the apartment with the apartment’s relationship
to everything around it. Within this scheme, it is the spaces where all these relationships
intersect that define Diener and Diener’s approach to space. Each project is unique, even
when details are repeated from previous commissions, and reflects the urban environment
around it. The firm has been key to the unique development of buildings in Switzerland.
This is particularly true in the Basel area, where the government obliges architects to
consider the urban pattern, the region’s culture, and its inhabitants when planning a minor
housing estate or a full city plan. A discipline to use minimal means and available


DIESTE, ELADIO 1917-2000

Architect and engineer, Uruguay

Eladio Dieste was born in Artigas, Uruguay, in 1917. He received his engineering
degree in 1943 from the University of the Republic in Montevideo, where he taught
structures from 1943 until 1973. In 1953 Dieste begin his association with the engineer
Eugenic Montafiez. For almost half a century, Dieste conducted research and worked
with reinforced brick. He developed structural masonry techniques using brick for water
tanks, factories, horizontal silos, churches, towers, and bus stations.

Dieste recognized that the conditions that generated modern architecture in Europe
and North America were distinct from those in Latin America. He reasoned that the
design opportunities presented in Latin American countries did not demand that solutions
resemble those produced in developed nations. He therefore understood that each culture
could integrate technological change in its own manner, according to its own reality.

Dieste relied on the rational economic use of construction materials and methods, a
respect for natural resources, and a knowledge of materials’ properties. Convinced that
development results from using regional techniques and technologies, he proposed
construction methods and materials that considered the social and economic conditions of
his country and the regions where he worked. Because Dieste used brick, one of the
oldest and most humble construction materials, his work proved that it is possible to
combine austerity and beauty and to understand local conditions while experimenting
rigorously.

Dieste employed the principles of simple and double curvature in concrete and
transferred it to brick and reinforced ceramic. This structural innovation allowed him to
benefit from the characteristics of the new material. His use of brick, as opposed to
concrete, offered lightness, responded to deformations, sustained the test of time, and
minimized maintenance. Because ceramic brick is more resistant to temperature changes
than concrete, it offers excellent thermal insulation. It is also inexpensive, acoustically
resilient, and easy to repair or modify.

Dieste experimented with two principal structural types: the Gaussa vault and the self-
supporting vault. The Gaussa vault contains a double curvature that combines brick, iron,
and mortar. The word coined by Dieste, refers to vaults that he employed to cover large
spaces using a minimal amount of reinforcement. The second type of vault that he often
employed was designed to be completely self-supporting. In both cases, he relied on
skills of regional workmen and used machinery that he designed and assembled.

One of the best examples of Dieste’s work can be seen in the celebrated Atlantida
church (1960, formerly a rectilinear warehouse. Dieste conceived a series of linear brick
walls that are straight at the base and begin to undulate in the middle as they approach a
double-curvature, continuous membrane roof. The conoidal-shaped walls and the
Gaussian vaults create a monolithic and powerful form. The spatial light recalls Le
Corbusier’s Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp, yet its conceptual distinction is seen in the


changing brick textures and sculptural lightness. The bell tower is constructed with
reinforced brick.

Dieste’s search for structural expression and formal richness is also achieved in the
Church in San Pedro, Durazno (1971). This church was built over the ruins of a parish
church that had been destroyed by fire. The old parish followed the traditional layout of a
central nave and two aisles separated by columns. The new structure consists of three
folded slabs, two walls slanting toward the interior, and the roof, all of which are
constructed of reinforced-brick membranes. The church follows the plan of the former
parish but eliminates the columns between the nave and the side aisles, achieving a
unified space. The interior is sober, enriched only by an altar and a rosette that is made up
of a five-centimeter-thick hexagonal screen that is unified by iron spokes. The brick bell
tower can be climbed to admire the landscape.

In the late 1960s, Dieste collaborated with the Brazilian government to build a series
of markets, the most significant of which is the enormous structure for the market at
Porto Alegre. Its central pavilion spans 47 meters and contains double-curved vaults and
skylights. Dieste designed other areas of the complex with self-supporting vaults.

While exploring structural innovations with the Gaussa vault, Dieste began to
experiment in the early 1960s with self-supporting vaults. He first used these light,
supporting structures in his home (1962). Later, in Salto, Uruguay, he designed several
buildings: the Municipal Bus Terminal (1974), the factory for the soft drinks “Refrescos
del Norte” (1978), and the Turlit Terminal (1980) for a private bus company. He
continued to develop these vaults at the Production Halls of Massaro Industries (1978) in
Joanicé, Uruguay, where he constructed pre-stressed vaults for the roof structure that
spanned 35 meters between pillars. One of these self-supporting vaults, only 10
centimeters thick, cantilevered 16 meters out from the entrance of the building. His
explorations culminated with works at “Lanas Trinidad” (1979-91) in Alta, where he
constructed vaults spanning up to 40 meters. In the Shopping Center of Montevideo
(1985), his explorations resulted in the reinterpretation of the thematic ideas vested in the
Atlantida church. An undulating line in the middle of the wall mediates the wall’s form,
which this time is straight at the base and the top. The undulating characteristic in the
wall expresses structural pressure exerted by the set of two self-supporting ceramic vaults
of the roof. This characteristic further absorbs lateral thrust and wind pressure. The floor
slab is part of the entire structural system. It illustrates Dieste’s ability to integrate his
formal sensitivity and material knowledge with structural demands.

Since the 1960s, Dieste’s work has been seriously studied in Latin America. His ideas
inspired those interested in the development of an architecture that responds to a Latin
American context. Outside Latin America, both his structural innovations and his poetic
approach to construction received only peripheral attention. He remains lesser known
than other Hispenic structural innovators, such as Felix Candela or Eduardo Torroja.

A refined and subtle beauty characterizes Dieste’s work. It embodies sophisticated yet
simple structures that combine varying brick-changing tonalities and patterns with
technical rigor. His projects reflect three major considerations: an expressive force of
local tradition, an integration of artistic and moral issues, and a knowledge of material
property and capabilities.


JOSE BERNARDI

Biography

Born in Artigas, Uruguay, 10 December 1917. Received a degree in engineering from the
University of the Republic, Montevideo, 1943. Married Elizabeth Friedham Utke,
1944:11 children. Engineer in the Ministry of Public Works, Montevideo, 1943-45;
engineer at the Represa Rincon del Bonete, Montevideo, 1945-46; chief engineer, Head
Architectural Technical Office, Ministry of Public Works, Montevideo, 1946-48; chief
engineer, Viermond SA, Montevideo, 1948-55. Founder and chief engineer, with
Eugenio R.Montafiez, of the firm Dieste and Montajiez, from 1955. Consultant engineer,
Salto Grande and Palmer Dams, Uruguay, from 1973. Professor of engineering,
University of the Republic, Montevideo, 1943-45; visiting professor and lecturer,
University of Buenos Aires, from 1959. Member, National Academy of Engineering,
Uruguay, 1966. Died in Montevideo, Uruguay 19 July 2000.

Selected Works

Atlantida Church, Canelones, Uruguay, 1960
Eladio Dieste House, Montevideo, Uruguay, 1962
San Pedro Church (restoration), Durazno, Uruguay, 1971
Central Market, Porto Alegre, Brazil 1971
Municipal Bus Terminal, Salto, Uruguay, 1974
Refrescos del Norte Factory, Coca-Cola Exporter, Salto, Uruguay, 1978
Production Halls, Massaro Industries, Joanicé, Uruguay, 1978
Turlit Terminal, Salto, Uruguay, 1980
Shopping Center, Montevideo, Uruguay, 1985

Lanas Trinidad, Alta, Uruguay, 1991

Selected Publications

1969

1970
1972

1972

Further Reading
Anderson, Stanford, by Princeton Architectural Press, 2003

Dieste, Eladio, Bogota, Colombia: Escala, 1987
(exhib. cat.), 2 vols., Seville: Consejeria de Obras Publicas y Transportes, 1997

Escolano, Victor Pérez, “Rigore e autenticita nell’opera di Eladio Dieste,’” 98 (1998)
Waisman, Marina, and César Naselli, “Eladio Dieste,” in by Waisman and Naselli,
Seville: Consejeria de Obras Publicas y Transportes, Direcci6n General de Arquitectura y
Vivienda, 1989

DISNEY THEME PARKS

Walt Disney’s theme parks personify many of the trends that appeared in the media-
saturated culture of postwar America, concentrated as entertainment centers for the
leisure society. At Disneyland in California and its younger and larger sibling, Walt
Disney World in Florida, Disney’s genius for authoring modern, cinematic fables was
brought to life in an amalgamation of hightech paraphernalia and scenographic artistry.
Visitors to the parks are able to live for a time in something like a movie set or, better yet,
a compact sequence of numerous movie fantasies. The principle behind Disney’s success
was an uncanny ability to re-create the concept of place in Postmodern terms, as realms
of inhabitable simulations and imagery that resonated well with a public raised on
nostalgia and the vicarious thrills of the movies and who yearned for a more benign form
of urbanism than the one confronting them daily. Combining aspects of amusement parks
and world fairs, they purified America’s public life in a new form of recreational spaces
whose spectacular popularity made them an architectural metaphor for America’s
consumer culture.

Disney had set out his intentions in a plaque located at the entrance to Disneyland
when it opened in 1955 on a site in Anaheim, California, a suburb of Los Angeles: “Here
you leave today and enter the world of yesterday, tomorrow and fantasy.” Disneyland’s
popularity was instantaneous. Designed largely by the in-house “Imagineers,” a talented
group of artists, artisans, and technicians who became the anonymous midwives of Walt
Disney’s vision, the park was shaped around explicit narrative concepts in which
buildings played the roles of symbolic characters in a landscape of picturesque settings
and sequenced storybook relationships. The plan for Disneyland was based on a simple,
almost classical diagram of axially joined thematic precincts: Main Street, a stage-set
reconstruction of a small 19th-century American town, began at the entrance and
terminated in a central hub in front of the towering fantasy figure of Sleeping Beauty’s
Castle. From there paths led off like the spokes of a wheel to Frontierland,
Adventureland, Fantasyland, and Tomorrowland.

The structure of the plan was filled out with lavish figural architectural settings that
replicated images drawn largely from popular culture, many of them planted by Disney’s
own animated films. The Disney strategy was to invert the formfollows-function formula
of modern architecture: by wrapping the attractions and their elaborate supporting
technology in scenographic costumes, the park was constructed like a stage set. Most of
the elaborate machinery that made the park work and the vast network of underground
tunnels and utilities that served and serviced the surface imagery were made invisible to
create the illusion that the purified simulations were operating independently, effortlessly,
and without distractions.


Disney’s vision of delight was filled with unabashed sentimentality and nostalgia;
Disneyland took the form of a small town of the kind that was rapidly disappearing from
the American scene. However, the town that was being portrayed was a denatured one, a
deliberate contrivance built of images that were idealized and mythical. The architecture
at Disneyland was designed to look right in ensembles of well-proportioned spaces,
formal relationships, and illusionary scale that were achieved, for example, by reducing
the buildings on Main Street to five-eighths scale to make them appear more toylike and
friendly. However, the park was also technically sophisticated and well planned and
engineered: As noted by many observers, Disney had produced something that had
eluded real cities, a truly integrated system of multilevel mass-movement systems that
included people movers, nonpolluting vehicles, monorails, pedestrian concourses, and
vast urban infrastructure.

Disneyland was hemmed in by uncontrolled peripheral growth that limited its size and
left it marooned in Los Angeles’s sprawl. When Disney began scouting sites for a second
park, his plans were far more expansive and ambitious. He had begun to think in Utopian
terms, imagining a vast urban plan that included not simply a single park but a series of
them as well as an industrial park and residential community. Where Disneyland is a day
trip, Walt Disney World becomes a weeklong expedition consisting of the Magic
Kingdom as well as EPCOT, Disney MGM Studios, Pleasure Island, several water parks,
two shopping centers, and dozens of hotels, all organized into an interconnected unit
more than 180 times larger than Disneyland.

Disney’s principle interests focused on EPCOT, an acronym for “Experimental
Prototype Community of Tomorrow.” He envisioned an idealized city based on modern
planning principles that, in one of its iterations, was contained under a vast glass bubble
to ensure a perfect climate. The plan reflected some of the ideas of the 19th-century
English planner Ebenezer Howard’s radial garden cities, rendered here in sleek, futuristic
architecture. Commerce was located in a dense cluster of modern towers at the center
surrounded by a series of expanding rings containing apartments, a green belt, and finally
low-density, suburban-style neighborhoods. Reflecting Disney’s interest in transportation
technology, the city was to be linked by a monorail and a network of people movers.
Disney imagined the city as a demonstration of the potentials for a modern city built
along scientific principles as an alternative to the degradation he saw in the environments
of America’s cities. He described EPCOT as “a planned, controlled community, a
showcase for American industry and research, schools, cultural and educationa
opportunities. In EPCOT there will be no slum areas because we won’t let them
develop.”

However, the EPCOT that was built in 1982 after Walt Disney’s death resembled
nothing so much as a world’s fair. The World Showcase, a collection of nationality
pavilions designed to show typical architecture or familiar landmarks of the represented
countries, was arranged in a loop around a man-made lagoon. Future World, the other
part of the park, featured giant corporate-sponsored pavilions, including General Motors
(“motion”), Exxon (“energy”), and Kodak (“imagination”). The two parts of the park are
separate realms, each with different architectural treatments. Where the Future World
pavilions are huge, nondescript sheds with little exterior detail or figuration beyond their
lumpy shapes, the buildings in World Showcase are elaborately crafted inside and out,
many of them using traditional crafts of the represented countries. The central figure is a


huge, silver geodesic dome symbolizing “Spaceship Earth,” reminiscent of the United
States Pavilion at Expo ’67 in Montreal.

Scholar Alfred Heller summed up the disappointment of many who had expected a
more ambitious agenda for EPCOT. Writing in he said, “It’s not an experimental
community or a prototype community or an experimental prototype of a community. It’s
not a community at all. It may be a prototype adult amusement park for the world of
tomorrow.” Disney’s dream of creating a real residential community would have to wait
until Celebration Florida was constructed in the early 1990s. By then, however, the vision
had changed to the terms of the new urbanism. Celebration looked more like Main Street
in the Magic Kingdom than the futurist city Disney originally imagined for EPCOT.

Michael Eisner, Walt Disney’s successor as head of the Disney enterprises, developed
an enthusiasm for architecture that led to the commissioning of buildings by some of the
most distinguished architects of the day. Eisner provided a fertile ground for Postmodern
architects to push the limits of convention in a succession of flamboyant buildings that
were clearly influenced by Disney’s philosophy of playfulness, irony, and wit. Michael
Graves’s designs for the Swan and Dolphin hotels (1989 and 1990, respectively) at Walt
Disney World in Florida, the first of these large commissions, were startlingly colorful
buildings, decorated inside and out with grotesque, overscaled details and sculptures, the
most outrageous of which were the pairs of enormous swans and dolphins perched on
their roofs. The hotels seemed to push the Postmodernist tendencies then on the rise into
the realm of self-parody by subverting the well-composed facades with Disney-style
kitsch.

Confidence in the success of the theme park formula led to the packaging of plans and
technology for Tokyo Disney, which opened in 1983. However, Disney officials had set
their eyes on Europe and a site in Marne-la-Vallee, a short distance outside Paris. Euro
Disney (now Disneyland Paris) presented the designers with a number of new problems,
among them the cultural question of how to make the essentially American imagery
compelling in a country that had its own traditions and its own real castles. They decided
to intensify the American theme rather than attempting to replicate local traditions.
Convinced of the importance of creating a destination resort rather than simply a
freestanding park, Disney officials embarked on an ambitious plan that included not only
the park itself, which was in many respects simply a more refined copy of Walt Disney
World in Florida, but a surrounding village of six hotels as well. Like the international
buildings in the World Showcase, each hotel at Euro Disney was designed to evoke
scenes of America, including Michael Graves’s Art Deco urban landscape; Robert Stern’s
Newport Bay Club, modeled after a New England yacht club and the Cheyenne, a back-
lot, western movie set; Antoine Grumbach’s romantic Sequoia Lodge, resembling the
rustic wood and stone hotels in America’s national parks; and Anton Predock’s haunting,
minimalist Hotel Santa Fe, which on one side evoked the vernacular architecture of the
American Southwest and on the other a drive-in movie theater complete with a billboard
“screen” picturing Clint Eastwood. A sixth and the largest of the hotels, a High Victorian
confection designed by the Disney Imagineers, served as an entrance into the park. Frank
Gehry was given the assignment of designing a shopping and dining concourse called
Festival Disney linking the hotels with the theme park that he made into a strip-center
version of main street with a promenade of abstract, metal-skinned building forms


punctuated by aluminum-clad pylons, all heavily garnished with neon and diner-style
kitsch.

All Disney’s built projects have been the subject of considerable critical attention.
From their inception, the theme parks in particular were easy targets for social critics,
who made them into sacrificial symbols of American consumer culture. To many
architects and critics, the term “Disney” became synonymous with fakery and
disingenuousness. However, the ambience of Disney was the art of the simulation—
“masterpieces of falsification,” as semiologist Umberto Eco wrote; and as long as they
remained corralled within the precincts of the theme parks, they were the circumscribed
experiences of entertainment.

However, architecture itself was shifting away from modernist ideals and into a
romance with the ingratiating image. The proliferation of the synthetic over the natural
had invaded the whole culture; as cultural geographer Edward Soja put it, a new wave
had “carried hyperreality out of the localized enclosures and tightly bound rationality of
the old theme parks and into the geographies and biographies of everyday life, into the
fabric and fabrication of exopolis.” With certain reservations, urbanists often marveled at
the consummate skill with which the parks were put together and managed. Architectural
historian Reyner Banham praised Disneyland as “an almost faultless organization for
delivering, against cash, almost any type at all of environmental experience that human
fancy, however inflamed could ever devise” (1971). Architect Charles Moore described
the park as “the most important single piece of construction in the West in the past
several decades” (1965).

Disney was an analogical thinker; his particular kind of inventiveness was to see the
new possibilities available by investing in things already at hand or in memory. It was a
combination of nostalgia and pragmatism: building the new out of reinterpretations and
recombinations of what had become before. This also became one of the principles of the
New Urbanism, a movement that rejected the urban experiments of modernism and
sought instead to create urban models patterned on the things that worked in the past. In a
somewhat curious involution, the art and science of Disneyland were being imitated in
real-life places—in the malls, in resorts, and in the redevelopment of towns and
townscapes. The theme park and the realities of living communities were beginning to
join seamlessly together. However, to do so, as Disney demonstrated, required a
purification of the sources and a simplification of the problem and a strong measure of
central control.

BRUCE C.WEBB
Amusement Park; Art Deco; Banham, Reyner (United States); Gehry,
Frank (United States); Graves, Michael (United States); Moore, Charles
(United States); Postmodernism; Shopping Center; Stern, Robert A.M.
(United States)

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, New York: Harper and Row, and London: Allen Lane, 1971
Dunlop, Beth, New York: Abrams, 1996

Eco, Umberto, translated by William Weaver, London: Seeker and Warburg, 1986; as
translated by William Weaver, San Diego, California: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

1986
Fjellman, Stephen M., Boulder, Colorado, and Oxford: Westview Press, 1992
Marling, Karal Ann (editor), Montreal, Quebec: Canadian Centre for Architecture,

and Paris and New York: Flammarion, 1997
Moore, Charles W., “You Have to Pay for the Public Life,” 9-10 (1965)
Sorkin, Michael, “See You in Disneyland” in edited by Sorkin, New York: Hill
and Wang, 1992

DOM-INO HOUSES

Housing design by Le Corbusier, 1914-15 and later

Between 1914 and 1915, Le Corbusier, partly encouraged by his friend Max du Bois,
conceived of a standardized system of construction using reinforced concrete, which was
to provide the structural basis of most of his houses through the mid-1930s. These were
the Dom-ino prefabricated houses with independent skeletons. The frame was to be
completely independent of the floor plans of the houses. Derived from the Hennebique
frame, it consisted of six thin concrete columns that simply carried two horizontal slabs
as the floors. The columns and slabs were connected by staircases. Apart from this
structural core of the houses, nothing else was fixed, thus permitting a great flexibility to
suit demands on the basis of aesthetics, climate, composition, or view. The floor plan was
also extremely flexible, as interior partitions were independent of the grid. This utterly
simple and clear “open plan” method did away with load-carrying walls. Supporting
beams for the ceiling slabs were eliminated. The vertical supports, recessed with respect
to the exterior walls, allowed the facade to be freestanding, allowing windows to go
easily around corners. The houses were to be built of standardized elements to be
attached to one another in a wide variety of combinations, allowing for a great range in
the grouping of the houses. This was not only a highly innovative idea from the technical
standpoint but also an entirely new method of construction that promised rapid,
economical mass housing.

At this time, reinforced concrete was still a relatively unused material for construction.
After Tony Garnier and Auguste Perret, Le Corbusier was one of the first to advocate its
use. For Dom-ino houses, there was to be a special on-site arrangement for pouring
concrete to produce completely smooth and even floor slabs. A contractor would provide
the frames. Other, specialized contractors would furnish different, mass-produced
building material on the order of the architect-planner or the client. After windows and
doors had been attached, the exterior walls would be built.

The system was conceived as a solution for the post-World War I rebuilding problem.
At the time, reports of war devastation in Flanders were the major news. Dom-ino houses
demonstrate Le Corbusier’s awareness of housing not only as an important social and
architectural problem but also an industrial process. Construction would be transformed
into a scientifically run, large-scale activity. The Dom-ino house marked a significant


step in Le Corbusier’s quest for developing a standardized, rational solution to the
problem of housing.

The name “Dom-ino” invites several levels of interpretation. “Dom-ino” invoked
Latin for “house.” As a patent industrial label, it was also a play on the word
appropriate for a standardized house. In plan, the six-point supports resemble a
rectangular domino chip. The physical form of the houses could also be interpreted in
terms of dominoes, with the columns as domino dots and the zigzag pattern of a group of
these houses as formations of dominoes. Le Corbusier also saw Dom-ino as a product
(the architectural equivalent), in both form and mode of assembly, of a perfectible
industrial object. Experiments with the Dom-ino prototype and the Citrohan House of
1920-22 were based on his belief that a perfectible housing type could be formulated. He
expressed this belief in the famous phrase “a house is a machine for living” in in 1921.
Widely misinterpreted as a functionalist statement, this meant that a house could be just
as rationally produced as any object-type. In (Toward a New Architecture), Le
Corbusier wrote, “if we erase all rigid notions of the house from our hearts and minds and
look at the question from a critical and objective point of view, we will inevitably arrive
at the ‘house-tool,’ the mass-production house within everyone’s reach, incomparably
healthier than the old (even morally) and imbued with the beauty of the working tools of
our daily lives.” The universal house-machine was to provide aesthetic pleasure as well
as functional efficiency and healthy surroundings.

Dom-ino houses were not built in Flanders during the war; its principles as economical
housing only began to be applied in 1928 in France with the passing of the Loucheur
Law, which was aimed at building 200,000 low-income housing units. In the meantime,
the principles of the Dom-ino house were applied to the elegant Villa Schwob in La
Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland (1916), which successfully synthesized the potential of the
Hennebique frame and stylistic elements drawn from elsewhere. It is one of the first
concrete-frame villas in Europe. The Dom-ino house was further evolved into the
Citrohan House, which was exhibited at the Salon d’Automne of 1922. Much more
sophisticated than the Dom-ino house, the Citrohan House represented for the first time a
duplex design with a double-height living space, a mezzanine, and children’s bedrooms
on the roof. This marked the initial development of one of Le Corbusier’s characteristic
spatial treatments: interlocking spaces of different, proportional heights. These
superimposed duplexes with two-to-one interior space, spiral staircases, and garden roofs
would be a major recurrent theme and also figure as the villa blocks of the Contemporary
City for Three Million Inhabitants (1922). This type was derived from the 19th-century
artist’s atelier and the of Mediterranean architecture.

Le Corbusier’s houses up to 1935 evolved from the structures of the Dom-ino house
and the Citrohan House and consisted of freestanding columns and cantilevered floor
slabs. The almost cubelike Cook House (1962) in Boulogne, one of the high points of this
period, incorporated mechanistic analogies and the aesthetics of purist painting. The Villa
Stein/de Monzie (1927) in Garches, with a unique outdoor room that is half inside and
half outside, demonstrated the potential of the Dom-ino skeleton to become a
superimposed or overlapping set of layers. The Orbus Plan (1932) included smal! Dom-
ino house cells for the working class. Le Corbusier considered his formulation of the
elemental form of pure column and pure slab as central to his lifelong oeuvre.

HAZEL HAHN

Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) France; Garnier, Tony;
Perret, Auguste; Functionalism; Contemporary City for Three Million
Inhabitants

Further Reading

Boesiger, Willy, and Hans Girsberger (editors), _ (trilingual German-French-English
edition), Zurich: Editions d’ Architecture, New York: Praeger, and London: Thames and
Hudson, 1967; 3rd edition, Zurich: Verlag fiir Architektur, 1991
Corbusier, Le, edited by Jacques Guiton, translated by Margaret Guiton, New
York: Braziller, 1981
Curtis, William J.R., Oxford: Phaidon, and New York: Rizzoli, 1986
Frampton, Kenneth, London: Thames and Hudson, and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1980; 3rd edition, London: Thames and Hudson, 1992
Frampton, Kenneth, translated by Frank Straschitz, Paris: Hazan, 1997; English edition,
New York: Thames and Hudson, 2001
Frampton, Kenneth, and Roberto Schezen, Le Corbusier: Architect of the Twentieth
Century, New York: Abrams, 2002
Lucan, Jacques (editor), Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1987
Raeburn, Michael, and Victoria Wilson (editors), London: Arts Council of Great
Britain, 1987
Serenyi, Peter (editor), | Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, and London: Prentice Hall,
1975

DOSHI, BALKRISHNA V. 1927—

Architect, India

Balkrishna V.Doshi belongs to the generation of architects that commenced working
soon after India’s independence in 1947. Influenced by the thinkers of the independence
movement, Doshi’s career is devoted to establishing an identity for the contemporary
Indian architecture, and he has accomplished this by rooting his work in the regional
context, marrying his designs with the local environment, and building on India’s rich
architectural and building traditions.

Born in 1927 in Poona (Pune), a city near Bombay (Mumbai), Doshi was raised in a
religious family that was engaged in the traditional carpentry business. Observing his
drawing skills, his art teacher encouraged him to pursue architectural education. In 1947,
Doshi joined the J.J. School of Art in Bombay; unhappy with the course of studies, he
quit the program in 1950 and decided to go to London, where he met Le Corbusier at
CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne). Following that meeting, Doshi
moved to Paris to work with Le Corbusier, who at that time was designing the city of
Chandigarh and other large Indian commissions as well as his influential European

projects, such as La Tourette and Jaoul House. Profoundly influenced by Le Corbusier’s
work, Doshi returned to India in 1955 to look after the master’s projects in Chandigarh
and in Ahmedabad, where he also chose to settle.

The first decade of Doshi’s work was strongly influenced by the work of Le
Corbusier, including key projects from this era, such as the low-cost housing for the

workers of the Ahmedabad Textile Ind

Physical Research Laboratory (PRL; 195
(1957), also in Ahmedabad. The Institut

with sun breakers and large overhangs or
Indian buildings. However, in this pro

lustry Research Association (ATIRA) and the
7) in Ahmedabad and the Institute of Indology
e of Indology is an exposed-concrete structure
“parasols,” devices used by Le Corbusier in his
ject Doshi also managed to make a regional

architectural statement. The building is subdivided into small units and looks like it could
have been built using wooden post-and-beam elements. Large verandas and natural
cooling and ventilation also remind us of the traditional wooden _ half-timber courtyard
dwellings of Guajart. Moreover, the refined proportions, fine workmanship, and elegant
finishes of the Indology Institute make it more delicate compared to Le Corbusier’s

style of Indian projects.

The second phase of Doshi’s practice was tempered by the work of the great American
architect Louis I.Kahn. Doshi invited Kahn to design the facilities for the Indian Institute
of Management (IIM) complex in Ahmedabad. From the beginning of 1960s until the
sudden death of Kahn in 1974, Doshi and he remained close friends and associates. This
relationship touched Doshi’s work in several ways: his use and choice of materials
became refined, the play of geometry in his buildings got richer, and buildings started to
demonstrate great depth and concern for light and shade and spirituality, all hallmarks of
Kahn’s work. Some key buildings from this phase of Doshi’s work include the Township
(1964) for Gujarat State Fertilizers in Baroda (Vadodra), the School of Architecture
(1966, first phase) in Ahmedabad, the Township (1968) for the Electronics Corporation
of India in Hyderabad, and the Parikh Residence (1974) in Ahmedabad. Kahn’s design
influence is evident in two township projects in which Doshi employed simple but
efficient load-bearing wall structures and clean geometry to organize unit plans and to
control the entry of light into each dwelling. Doshi’s School of Architecture building,
with its heavy load-bearing brick walls and industrial north lighting, also closely
resembles Kahn’s IIM complex, its dormitory and classroom areas in particular.

Doshi’s active involvement in education coincides with his second phase of practice.
In 1962, he and several colleagues established the Ahmedabad School of Architecture,
which has become the Center of Environmental Planning and Technology, comprised of
schools of planning, interior design, and building construction and a visual arts center.
Doshi is also the founder and director of the Vastu-Shilpa Foundation, a nonprofit group
for studies and research in environmental design. Doshi has regularly served as a visiting
professor at most leading American and European universities, inspiring a new
generation of designers and planers.

The last 25 years of Doshi’s architectural work has been the most exuberant, and no
doubt the richest, phase of his work. This architecture owes little to his mentors and more
to the cultural and building traditions of India. Projects from this time blend beautifully
with their surroundings and, more important, convey a sense that they are somehow
Indian. Important projects from this phase are the Indian Institute of Management (1977)
in Bangalore; the Administrative Complex (1979) for the Madhya Pradesh Electricity


Board in Jabalpur; Sangath (1979), the architect’s own office, in Ahmedabad; the Gandhi
Labor Institute (1980) in Ahmedabad; Aranya low-cost housing (1983) in Indore; and the
Diamond Bourse (1994) in Bombay (Mumbai).

Aranya is truly a model housing project for a developing nation such as India. A 6500-
plot development, 65 percent of which is reserved for very poor clients, Aranya is
inspired by the traditional lifestyle and patterns of living observed in low-income
neighborhoods. To maintain marketability of high-income plots and to avoid segregation,
each income groups’ plots are configured around a sophisticated arrangement of plots and
public open spaces in concentric rings in six distinct sectors. Large open spaces are
avoided, but that space is evenly distributed in small parcels to accommodate various
cottage industries and the spillover of home-based income generation. The principles of
Doshi’s recent architectural projects are also uniquely inspiring. Architecture is not
entirely form related but is ordered by simple principles, such as the systemic collection
and shedding of rainwater in the design of Sangath and the Gandhi Labor Institute and
the apparently irregular fanning of the towers to maximize natural lighting in the offices
of the Diamond Bourse. The use of simple design allows Doshi to compose his
buildings as a loose approximation of traditional places and to build them in harmony
with the climate, culture, and construction practices of India, making his projects
captivating and memorable.

VIKRAM BHATT

Sangath, (1979) view of the vaulted
and flatroof buildings around the
terraced court, Anmedabad, India

Photo by Joseph N. St. Anne
© Aga Khan Award for Architecture

Biography

Born in Poona, India, 26 August 1927. Attended Fergusson College, Poona 1946; studied
at the J.J. School of Art, Bombay 1946-50. Married Kamala Parikh 1955:3 children.
Senior designer with Le Corbusier, Paris, for major buildings in Chandigarh and
Ahmedabad, India 1951-57; represented Le Corbusier and supervised his projects in
Ahmedabad 1954-57. Private practice, Ahmedabad from 1956; practiced under the firm
name of Vastu-Shilpa 1956-77; member, Advisory Board, Tokyo from 1971; senior
partner, Stein, Doshi, and Bhalla, Ahmedabad and New Delhi from 1977. Visiting
professor, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 1958, 1960, 1964, 1967, 1977,
1980; visiting professor, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 1964, 1967, 1968,
1977, 1982, 1984; visiting professor, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 1977;
visiting professor, Rice University, Houston, Texas 1977; Paul Philippe Cret Professor of
Architecture, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 1984; distinguished professor,
School of Architecture and School of Planning, Ahmedabad 1987; visiting professor,
Berlage Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands 1991. Founder and honorary director,
School of Architecture, Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology, Ahmedabad
1962-72; founder and honorary director, honorary dean, School of Planning, Centre for
Environmental Planning and Technology, Ahmedabad 1972-78; founder and director,
Vastu-Shilpa Foundation for Studies and Research in-Environmental Design from 1978;
dean emeritus, Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology, Ahmedabad from
1981; founder and honorary director, Kanoria Centre for the Arts, Ahmedabad from
1984. Member, Team X 1967-71; fellow, Indian Institute of Architects 1971; fellow,
Royal Institute of British Architects 1971; honorary fellow, American Institute of
Architects 1971; member, Building International, London 1972-76; vice president,
Council of Architecture, Government of India 1973-74; member, Scientific and
Technical Advisory Council, Kent State University, Ohio from 1975; member, steering
committee, 1998 Aga Khan Awards for Architecture. Aga Khan Award for Architecture
1995.

Selected Works

Low-cost housing for workers of the Ahmedabad Textile Industry Research Association
(ATIRA), Ahmedabad, 1957

Physical Research Laboratory (PRL housing), Ahmedabad, 1957

Institute of Indology, Ahmedabad, 1957

Science Faculty Buildings for Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, 1959

Township for Gujarat State Fertilizers, Baroda (Vadodra), 1964
School of Architecture, Ahmedabad, 1966

Township for the Electronics Corporation of India, Hyderabad, 1968

Premabhai Hall, Ahmedabad, 1972

Parikh Residence, Ahmedabad, 1974

Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, 1977

Administrative, Laboratory, Dormitory and ancillary facilities for the International
Crop Research Institute for Semi-Arid Tropics, Hyderabad, 1977

Administrative Complex for the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board, Jabalpur, 1979
Sangath, architect’s own office, Ahmedabad, 1979
Gandhi Labor Institute, Anmedabad, 1980
Aranya low-cost housing, Indore, 1983
Maharashtra Institute of Development Administration, Poona (Pune), 1987
National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi, 1990

Diamond Bourse, Bombay (Mumbai), 1994

Selected Publications

1986
“Planning for a Community—Vidyadhar Nagar,” (August 1990)

Further Reading

Belluardo, James, and Kazi Khaleed Ashraf (editors), New York:
Architectural League of New York, 1998
Bhatt, Vikram, “Architecture for a Developing India,’ (Summer 1999)
Bhatt, Vikram, and Peter Scriver, Ahmedabad: Mapin, 1990
Curtis, William J.R., New York: Rizzoli, 1988
Lang, Jon T., Madhavi Desai, and Miki Desai, Delhi and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997
Steele, James, New York: Whitney Library of Design, and London: Thames
and Hudson, 1998

DUANY AND PLATER-ZYBERK

Architecture and town planning firm, United States

The firm of Duany and Plater-Zyberk and Company (DPZ) was formed in 1980. They
have designed a number of award-winning, internationally published buildings that
explore the transformation of local building tradition through classical systems of order.
Their early Key Biscayne houses—Hibiscus (1981), De la Cruz (1983), Vilanova
(1985)—and commercial buildings, such as Galen Medical (1983), in Boca Raton, reflect
the grounding of abstract principles of architectural ordering borrowed from Le
Corbusier’s evolutionary theories of modernism as derived from classicism.

As architecture students at Yale University in the early 1970s, Andrés Duany and
Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk absorbed the university’s eclectic approach to the study of
architecture with a growing emphasis on the craft-based tradition of building exemplified
in early America’s vernacular architecture. The theories of Vincent Scully, who decried
the fierce effects of urban redevelopment schemes and proposed a view of architecture

that included reconsideration of the traditional language of construction, laid the
groundwork for what would become the DPZ practice.

Duany and Plater-Zyberk joined the architecture faculty of the University of Miami in
1974 and 1979, respectively. Their dual commitment to architecture education and
practice established their methods of working. Léon and Rob Krier, along with Colin
Rowe, were among the leading theorists who inspired the firm’s expansion of an
architectural method to the design of neighborhoods and the development of plans for
towns and cities and laid the foundation for an approach to town planning that is
architecturally conceived. The first town design (Seaside, 1979, on Florida’s panhandle)
was an experiment in establishing specifically designed spaces that ensure urbanity
through ordinance. DPZ’s subsequent Traditional Neighborhood Development Ordinance
further codified the process of translating physical design to legal prescriptions for land
use, allocation, and regulation. The textual and graphic codes of the ordinance establish
the regulating plan; urban, architectural, and landscape regulations; and street type.
Beginning in Seaside, DPZ generally exempts public buildings from such regulations to
distinguish civic monument from domestic and commercial fabric. DPZ moved from
new-town design to improvements in existing communities with an emphasis on
reinforcing neighborhood identity and ensuring physical predictability through ordinance.
In 1988, Duany and Plater-Zyberk founded what is now the Town Design program at
the University of Miami to actively engage and train graduate students in the process of
designing and building towns and communities. Duany and Plater-Zyberk, with faculty
and practitioners from across the nation, cofounded the Congress for the New Urbanism
(CNU), which expands the pioneering work of the founders from an initial academic
inquiry into a national movement for urban reform. The CNU advocates the development
and redevelopment of towns and cities through a cohesive effort marked by a
coordination of architecture and infrastructure with environmental, social, and economic
initiatives.

Moreover, the architects have focused on buildings that enhance community. DPZ has
engaged inner-city building with Florida projects such as the Mission San Juan Bautista
(1996), a small mission church in Wynwood; La Estancia (1997), a migrant workers’
housing complex in Tampa; and the DPZ office (1990) near Miami’s Calle Ocho. Public
projects such as the Florida City Civic Complex (1996), done with Lidia Abello and
Derrick Smith, directly address issues of urbanism and use formal properties of space and
light to demonstrate civic principles, as in the linkage of the main hall’s skylight
illumination of the interior with the action of a government in the “sunshine,” Florida’s
law that mandates that all discussions of public officials on public issues be held with
appropriate notice and in a public forum.

Concepts of urbanism rooted in local tradition are at the foundation of
DPZ’s urban design projects around the world, including the development
of Kemer Village (1992) in Istanbul, Turkey, and Dos Rios (Manila, 1999)
in the Philippines. Consistency of materials, structure, organizing devices,
and use of local traditions gives DPZ’s architecture a close and specific
association with the conditions of the site, first as a historic, cultural
entity, then as an environmental and social ecology, and then as an

architectural continuum. The buildings and urban projects


Aerial view, Kentlands, Maryland,
1991 project designed by Duany and
Plater-Zyberk

© Duany and Plater-Zyberk

Master Plan, Kentlands, Maryland
(1991)

© Duany and Plater-Zyberk

demonstrate DPZ’s central philosophy, which values architecture as the agent of
community and as essential to a civil society.
JOANNA LOMBARD

Arquitectonica (United States); New Urbanism; Suburban Planning;
Urban Planning

Biography
Andrés Duany

Born in New York, 7 September 1949; son of Andrés J.Duany, real estate developer and
builder. Studied architecture at Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 1971.
Received a graduate degree in architecture from Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut 1974; studied at the Ecole des Beaux Arts, Paris. Worked in the offices of
Ricardo Bofill and Robert A.M.Stern. Founded Arquitectonica with Bernardo Fort-
Brescia, Hervin Romney, Laurinda Spear, and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk; partner, Andrés
Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, Architects and Town Planners from 1980. Professor,
University of Miami from 1974; cofounder, Town Design Program, University of Miami
1988; cofounder, Congress for New Urbanism.

Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk

Born in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, 10 December 1950; daughter of Josaphat Plater-
Zyberk, architect, and Maria Plater-Zyberk, gardener. Studied architecture at Princeton
University, Princeton, New Jersey 1972; graduate degree from Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 1974; teaching assistant to Vincent Scully at Yale. Architectural
intern with Venturi Rauch and Scott-Brown. Founded Arquitectonica with Bernardo Fort-
Brescia, Hervin Romney, Laurinda Spear, and Andrés Duany; partner, Andrés Duany and
Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, Architects and Town Planners from 1980. Professor, University
of Miami from 1979; cofounder, Town Design Program, University of Miami 1988;
cofounder, Congress for New Urbanism.

Selected Works

The Town of Seaside, Florida, 1979
Hibiscus House, Coconut Grove, Florida, 1981
Galen Medical Building, Boca Raton, 1983
De la Cruz House, Key Biscayne, 1983
Vilanova House, Key Biscayne, 1985
Blount Springs, Alabama, 1988
Downtown Plan, Mashpee Commons, Massachusetts, 1988
Windsor, Florida, 1989
Avalon Park, Florida, 1989
Duany Plater-Zyberk Office, Miami, 1990
Kentlands, Maryland, 1991
Kemer Village, Istanbul, 1992
Cleveland Central Commons Neighborhood, 1993
Mission San Juan Bautista, Wynwood, Florida, 1996
Florida City Civic Complex (with A+S Architects), 1996
La Estancia, Tampa, 1997

Dos Rios, Manila, 1999

Selected Publications
Andrés Duany

“Principles in the Architecture of Alvar Aalto,” 5 (1986)

“En Loge,” in edited by Charlotte Milholland, 1987
“The Future of La Habana,” in 1997

Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk

“The Three Traditions of Miami,” in edited by Maurice Culot and Jean Frangois
Lejeune, 1992

“Tt Takes a Village to Raise a Child,” in 1994
“The Wrecker’s House,” in 3 (1997)

Andrés Duany and Elizabeth Plater Zyberk

“The Town of Seaside,” 2 (1985)
“Andrés Duany, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk,” 6—7 (September 1988)
“The Neighborhood, the District, and the Corridor,” in edited by Peter Katz, 1994
“The Second Coming of the American Small Town,” (Winter1992)

“Site Planning,” in 1994
(with Jeff Speck), 2000

Further Reading

Both Krier and Scully locate the intellectual center of the work of DPZ. Krieger and
Lennertz organized an exhibition at Harvard’s Graduate School of Design, and the
subsequent book—which features essays by Vincent Scully, Patrick Pinnell, and Leon
Krier—remains the most comprehensive collection of DPZ’s urban work. Mohney and
Easterling curated an exhibition on Seaside at the Architectural League of New York, and
the subsequent book continues to be the most complete representation of the planning,
design, and construction of Seaside. Duany and Plater-Zyberk’s own book with Jeff
Speck, offers a complete summary of the values and process of the urban projects.

Duany, Andrés, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, and Jeff Speck, New York: North Point
Press, 2000
Krieger, Alex, and William Lennertz (editors), New York: Rizzoli, 1991

Krier, Leon, “The Reconstruction of Vernacular Buildings and Classical Architecture,”
12 (12 September 1984)
Mohney, David, and Keller Easterling, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, and
London: Phaidon, 1991
Scully, Vincent, New York: Holt Reinhart and Winston, and London: Thames and
Hudson, 1969; revised edition, New York: Holt, 1988

DUDOK, WILLEM MARINUS 1884-1974

Architect, the Netherlands

Willem Marinus Dudok, a city architect for Hilversum, the Netherlands, a
small town southeast of Amsterdam, is well known for his distinctive
contribution to the modernism of the early 20th century. His architecture
provided a compositional strength and visual richness that transformed the
otherwise traditional and conservative community of Hilversum into the
modern age.

Born in 1884 in Amsterdam to musician parents, Johannes Cornelis and Cornelia
Bertha (née Holst), Dudok claimed that his architectural design was influenced more by
the great composers than by the great architects. Much to the disappointment of his
parents, though, rather than pursue music, Dudok chose a career in the army. He attended
Alkmaar Cadet School and later Breda Military Academy, where he was trained in
military engineering, with a focus on fortification planning. Over time, he taught himself
architecture, and when he was promoted to lieutenant-engineer in the Royal Engineering
Corps, he joined a team that planned and built fortifications that were to surround
Amsterdam, possibly his first experience with building. In 1913, he left the army and
began work as the deputy director of Public Works for the town of Leiden, moving to
Hilversum two years later to become the Director of Public Works. He later became the
city architect in 1928, a position he held until his retirement in 1954.

Throughout Dudok’s long career in Hilversum, he is credited with building almost all
its public buildings and is thought to have been instrumental in producing a town
development plan that was based on the English Garden City movement promoted by
Briton Ebenezer Howard (1850-1928). Of Dudok’s 150 realized projects over his 50-year
career, 80 percent were within Hilversum’s local government area, and only four were
outside the Netherlands. Dudok was at his zenith between 1916 and 1930, when he
designed 13 public housing estates, some of which contained up to 180 buildings. In
addition, he designed 11 schools and extended two others. Other more utilitarian projects
included a sports park, an abattoir, pumping stations, and public utilities. The building
that became an icon and career acme, however, was the Hilversum Town Hall. Although
his design influence pervades the town, no other structure is as much of a masterpiece.
The Marriage between art and geometry succeeded with the culmination of his modernist
philosophy into a premier object d’art.

Dudok claimed to have acquired his ideas of architectural truth from Karel
P.C. de Bazel (1869-1923) and Hendrik Petrus Berlage (1854-1934). De
Bazel was a Theosophist whose mysticism and architectural theory
permeated the planimetric and volumetric geometry of his designs.
Berlage was also widely published; his works included a collection of six
essays titled (1911), thought to be one of his more important


anthologies. It was Berlage, considered the “Father of modern
architecture,” who first introduced the work of Frank Lloyd Wright
(1867-1959) to European architects. His interest and great admiration
caused him

Community Bath (1926) Hilversum, Netherlands, by Willem M.Dudok
© GreatBuildings.com

to pronounce that Wright was a master, “whose equal is yet to be found in Europe.” The
Wrightian philosophy of form and space definition was particularly espoused by the De
Stijl and the Amsterdam School movements.
Dudok also recognized Wright’s innovative design: “I saw his work for the first
time...and immediately recognized his greatness.” He was impressed by the “poetic
spirit’ and “harmonious construction” of his spaces. As a result, Wright then heavily
influenced Dudok’s subsequent work, but Dudok was also thought to have been affected
by Amsterdam School Expressionism, De Stijl fimctionalism, Delft School
traditionalism, Cubism, and Dutch vernacular. Dudok’s eclectic style was sometimes
mistakenly referred to as a “hybrid” of some or all of these elements. Dudok’s
independent approach to modernism made him one of the most influential architects
working in the Netherlands between the two world wars. This nonconformist unique style
is also sometimes attributed to his informal architectural training.

Dudok’s lifelong passion for music was reflected in the rhythm, mood, and character
of the proportions of his architecture, unifying it and enhancing its sculptural expression.
This response to modernism was restrained by the soft craftsmanship of the built form.
Dudok managed to express the ideals of modern architecture while still retaining the
traditional values of composition, craftsmanship, and materials but most importantly,
monumentality. Dudok emphasized that “monumentality is the most pure expression of
the human sense of harmony and order.” The monumental building stressed not only the


essential material elements but also its spirituality. Its value transcended the human
experience and entered the spiritual realm. This architectural theology in the form of built
reality formed a model for many later architects throughout Europe and the United States.
Unfortunately, as his “style” was repeatedly duplicated, his individuality and stylistic
superiority diminished. By the 1950s, his architecture no longer contained the artistic and
spiritual qualities that were inherent in the earlier works.
Dudok was celebrated in worldwide publications of his work. By 1924 international
books and journals showcased his projects, giving great attention to the town in which he
did most of his work. Hilversum briefly became an architectural mecca, attracting
admirers to study and perhaps worship Dudok’s work.
Dudok’s architecture earned several awards, including the gold medals of the Royal
Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1935, the American Institute of Architects (AIA)
in 1955, and the French Academy of Architecture in 1966. In his own country, he
received several other awards, including knighthood.
Dudok’s other notable projects include the Municipal Baths (1921) in Hilversum, the
columbarium of the creamery (1926) in Westerveld, The Netherlands students’ house of
the Cité Universitaire (1927) in Paris, “De Bijenkorf’ (1929) in Rotterdam, the
Monument on the Zuyderzee Dyke (1933), and the H.A.V. Bank (1934-35) in Schiedam.
Dudok’s independent style produced a range of modernist buildings, making him a
defining force in the Modern movement and a premier architect of his time.
ELISABETH A.BAKKER-JOHNSON

Amsterdam School; Berlage, Hendrik Petrus (The Netherlands); Cubism;

De Stijl; Garden City Movement; Hilversum Town Hall; Wright, Frank

Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

An exhaustive list of available material can be found in Langmead 1996.
Groenendijk, Paul, and Piet Vollaard, (Guide to Architecture in the Netherlands),
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Uitgeverij 010 Publishers, 1987
Holzbauer, Wilhelm, “Willem Marinus Dudok. Town Hall, Hilversum, The Netherlands,
1928-31,” 58 (1981)

Langmead, Donald, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1996
Magnee, Robert M.H. (editor), Amsterdam: G. van Saane “Lectura Architectonica,”
1954
Whittick, Arnold, New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1974
Wit, Wim de (editor), New York: Cooper-Hewitt Museum, The Smithsonian
Institution’s National Museum of Design; London and Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press, 1983

DUIKER, JOHANNES 1890-1935

Architect, the Netherlands

Although relatively unknown outside his native land during his brief life span, today
Johannes Duiker is recognized as among the foremost representatives of the the Dutch
version of functionalism, or (New Objectivity). The buildings of his maturity,
composed of crystalline volumes of great purity, executed without superfluous details,
rationally fulfill function while expressing modernity in all its spare beauty. The exciting
possibilities of 20th-century technique are transformed into radiant forms that engage the
mind and lift the spirit.

Duiker’s work cannot be discussed without citing two other Dutchmen, Bernard
Bijvoet (1889-1980) and the civil engineer Jan Gerko Wiebenga (1886-1974), with
whom Duiker frequently collaborated, thus honoring one of the ideals of the modern
movement: its stated emphasis on architecture as a cooperative profession. Although
Duiker’s lyrical architectural vision dominates, realization of the oeuvre is a result of
teamwork.

Like so many of their peers, Duiker and Bijvoet would achieve recognition through
competitions. Already in 1913 they won first prize for a church, never built, but their
entry of 1916 for the Karenhuizen, an elders’ hostel in Alkmaar, became their first
executed work (1918). They next triumphed in the most prestigious contest of the day,
that for the Academy of Fine Arts in Amsterdam in 1917 (Michel de Klerk, the leader of
the Amsterdam School, came in second); although their striking design, heavily
influenced by Frank Lloyd Wright, would never be erected, the prize money allowed
them to establish a partnership that would continue even after Bijvoet moved to Paris in
1925 to work for Pierre Chareau.

Duiker’s production can be divided into three phases. In the first, from 1913 to 1923,
he employed the traditional Dutch vocabulary of brick with stone trim, wooden sash, and
tile roofs and followed the lead of H.P.Berlage, the doyen of Dutch architecture. The
majority of commissions from this period are domestic, whether for groups of urban
townhouses or clusters of villas at Kijkduin (1919-23), all in The Hague. The next,
transitional period is foreshadowed in the entry to the Chicago Tribune Competition
(1922), which is indebted to De Stijl, a movement that Duiker would later criticize for its
aestheticism. However, it was in 1924, when Duiker discovered skeletal structures, that
the major shift toward a personal language appeared. This occurred at Stommeerkade 64
(1924) in Aalsmeer, a country house supported by a wooden frame and based on novel
motifs: shed (monopitch) roofs, window bands that turn the corner, a projecting circular
stair, and horizontal wooden siding. The interior spaces are clearly articulated in the
exterior massing. It is but a short step to the reinforced-concrete-and-steel skeletons and
glazed curtain walls of Duiker’s mature phase, which commenced with the Laundry in
Diemen (1924; extension 1925), built for the Koperen Stelenfonds (KSF, Copper Wire
Fund) of the ANDB (Netherlands Diamond Workers Union), which raised money by
retrieving and selling copper wire used in the diamond polishing process.


The encounter with this new client might have occurred as early as 1919 and was
brought about through Berlage’s recommendation. It equals in importance Duiker’s
introduction to skeletal construction, for several major projects were commissioned by
this socially conscious body dedicated to the well-being of employees of one of the main
industries in Amsterdam, namely, the preparation of diamonds for the international
market. The most extensive was for the sanatorium Zonnestraal (Sunshine) in Hilversum,
which received its definitive formulation in 1925 and was completed in 1928 to great
acclaim. The program was perfectly suited to Duiker’s growing concern with health, and
he utilized his new mastery of concrete construction to fashion a luminous series of
buildings intended to speed recovery from tuberculosis, an occupational hazard of the
diamond workers.

Duiker’s concurrent preoccupation with mass production and the tall building resulted
ina book, (1930), and a block of flats in The Hague, Nirwana (1927-30), both done in
collaboration with Wiebenga. American skyscrapers had captured the European
imagination and led to many fantastic projects, above all in Germany and the
Netherlands, but the modestly scaled Nirwana, comprising six stories of apartments set
between a ground story and a penthouse, seemed eminently feasible. It was intended as a
prototype, but despite structural innovations, the envisaged economies did not come
about, and the handsome building with its ingeniously designed corner windows remains
a unique example.

In 1928, Duiker joined the polemical Amsterdam group De 8, founded in 1927, and
was elected president in 1932. That same year he became the first editor of the
periodical published jointly with the similarly functionalist (Construct), established in
1920 in Rotterdam. From 1932 to 1935, Duiker filled its pages with thoughtful
commentary on the nature of the new architecture and, by extension, the new society,
shaped by scientific progress and mechanization, that it was to serve. When the was
criticized for its utilitarianism, Duiker responded that it was spiritual rather than
monetary economy he sought, utilizing new materials to dematerialize architecture and
embody the quickened tempo of modern life.

The four-story Fresh [Open-Air] School for the Healthy Child, (Amsterdam, 1929-30)
complements Duiker’s interest in hygiene, manifested at Zonnestraal, and maintains the
vocab ulary of exposed reinforced-concrete frame and window walls. Set behind an entry
building that dramatically spans the existing dwellings on the Cliostraat in Amsterdam,
the school demonstrates how Duiker achieved magic with the simplest and most direct
means.

One year before his death, Duiker received commissions for three significant
buildings, including the newsreel cinema Cineac (Amsterdam, 1934), ingeniously fitted
onto a miniscule plot and identified by a striking neon sign set high above the street, and
the department store Winter (Amsterdam, 1934), its transparent curtain wall stretching
the length of the facade to facilitate tempting views of the merchandise. He also began
work on the Grand Hotel and Theater Gooiland (1934-36) in Hilversum; after his death,
Bijvoet came from Paris to see to its execution, apparently adding a few touches of his
own.

Although Duiker rarely left the Netherlands, he was conversant with international
architectural events. With Wiebenga he submitted an entry to the League of Nations
competition, and although he was not present at the founding meeting of the Congrés


Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne (CIAM) in 1928, he participated in its third
conference on Rationelle Bebauungsweisen (1930) by sending a project for exhibition.
Throughout his professional career, Duiker followed advances in the natural sciences and
mathematics, believing that they pointed the way to an architecture that would free rather
than constrain its occupants and encourage them to pursue a wholesome lifestyle
invigorated by physical health and spiritual enlightenment.

HELEN SEARING

Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Berlage, Hendrik Petrus (the Netherlands);

De Stijl; the Netherlands; Open-Air School, Amsterdam; Zonnestraal

Sanatorium, Hilversum, the Netherlands

Biography

Born 1 March 1890 in The Hague, son of a school principal and a teacher. Enrolled in the
Technische Hogeschool, Delft 1907; studied under Henri Evers and J.F.Klinkhamer;
graduated with degree of — 1913. Married 1) Hermina Valken, 1919 (divorced 1925),
two children. Lived with and later married 2) Lucy Kupper (1925), who managed his
office. Worked for Henri Evers, Rotterdam, 1913-16, established partnership with
Bernard Bijvoet 1917-25, located first in The Hague, then in nearby Zandvoort;
independent practice in Amsterdam 1925, but continued collaborations, first with Bijvoet
and then with Wiebenga; joined De 8, 1928, elected president 1932. Editor, 1932-35;
with Wiebenga conducted studies about the technical aspects of tall buildings and of
prefabrication; died in Amsterdam 23 February 1935.

Selected Works
With Bijvoet

Karenhuizen home for the elderly, Krelagestraat, Alkmaar (modernized), 1918
Residential village Kijkduin (14 villas, some semidetached),
Scheveningselaan, The Hague, 1923

House for A.Suermondt, Stommeerkade 64, Aalsmeer, 1924

Laundry for the KSF, Diemen, 1924; extended 1925 (demolished)

Country house “Doelzicht,” Hilversum (demolished), 1925

Open-Air School, Amsterdam, 1930

Building for service personnel, Zonnestraal, Hilversum, 1931

Grand Hotel and Theater “Gooiland,” Hilversum, 1936

With Bijvoet and Wiebenga
Zonnestraal Sanatorium, Henri ter Meulen and Dresselhuys pavilions, ateliers,
Loosdrechtse Bos 7, Hilversum (restored), 1928

With Wiebenga:
“Nirwana” flats, Willem Witsenplein, The Hague, 1930

Duiker alone
Third Trade School (first commissioned with Bijvoet, 1921), Zwaardstraat 6,
Scheveningen, 1931
Cineac, Amsterdam (altered), 1934
Winter Department Store, Amsterdam (altered), 1934

Selected Publications

1930; reprinted as 1930

Further Reading

For a catalogue raisonné of Duiker’s works, see (1982).
Boga, Thomas (editor), (exhib. cat.), Zurich: Eidgenossischen Technischen
Hochschule, 1975. Essay in English by Robert Vickery

Buch, Joseph, [bilingual Dutch-English edition], Rotterdam: NAi publishers,
1993
Casciato, Maristella, Rome: CLEAR (Cooperativa Libraria Editrice Architettura),
1982
Derwig, Jan and Erik Mattie, [bilingual Dutch-English edition], Amsterdam:

Architectura et Natura, 1995
Duiker, Johannes, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1989
Duikergroep Delft, J. Rotterdam: Stichting Bouw, 1982
Fanelli, Giovanni, Florence: Firenze, Marchi and Bertolli, 1968; as [bilingual
Dutch-English edition], translated by Wim de Wit, Gravenhage: Staatsuitgeverij, 1978
Idsinga, Ton, Amsterdam: Arbeiderspers, 1986

Loghem, Johannes Bernandres van, Amsterdam: Kosmos, 1932
Milelli, Gabriele, Bari: Dedalo Libri, 1978
Molema, Jan, Rotterdam: 010, 1996
Rebel, Ben, Assen: Van Gorcum, 1983

Zoetbrood, Ronald, Amsterdam: Van Gennep, 1985

DULLES INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

Designed by Eero Saarinen and Associates, completed 1962

Chantilly, Virginia

This airport, located 28 miles southwest of Washington, D.C., was conceived as the
international gateway to the nation’s capi tal. President Eisenhower made the final site
selection in 1958, and the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) commissioned Eero Saarinen
and Associates to build the first American airport designed specifically to handle jet

airplanes. In a quirk of timing, this symbol of international welcome was named for
Eisenhower’s secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, the bellicose point man for
America’s Cold War policies before his death in 1959. The airport design was innovative
on several counts, including its automobile traffic pattern (with separate levels for
arrivals, departures, and parking) and its controversial “mobile lounges,” which detach
from the main terminal building to ferry passengers out to airplanes parked next to the
runways. In 1962 these odd-looking vehicles were considered a breakthrough in airport
efficiency and passenger comfort. The model was never copied at any other airport,
although the mobile lounges do remain in use at Dulles Airport, supplemented by a few
fixed gates added to the airport in the mid-1990s. Modifications to the airport were far
more visible in 1997, as work commenced to extend the main terminal building 300 feet
at either end, doubling its original length. Undisturbed by these alterations, the pagoda-
inspired air traffic control tower (initially planned to include an observation deck)
continues to oversee the airport, providing a strong vertical accent to balance the
emphatic horizontality of the site and the enlarged terminal building.
Saarinen had anticipated the need for expansion, designing the pavilion-like terminal
as a set of 15 modular bays that were easily replicated by the builders of the additions.
The bays, each 40 feet wide, are framed by rows of concrete piers standing a
monumentalizing 65 feet tall along the main facade and then dipping to 40 feet in height
on the air side of the pavilion as a sheltering gesture for passengers arriving aboard the
mobile lounges. As at the TWA Airport Terminal (1962), also designed by Eero Saarinen
and Associates and located at New York’s John F.Kennedy Airport, custom-styled
concrete supports were required to make possible the unique roof form at Dulles, justly
celebrated for its bold upward sweep from back to front. Saarinen described the roof as
“like a huge continuous hammock suspended between concrete trees [and] made of light
suspension-bridge cables between which the concrete panels of the roof deck fit.” The
piers of the opposing colonnades slant away from each other to counteract the load of the
poured-in-place slabs carried by the cables. However, as the architect acknowledged, “we
exaggerated and dramatized this outward slope [of the piers] to give the colonnade a
dynamic and soaring look as well as a stately and dignified one.” The desired effect was
to maintain some connection with Federal traditions of static, neoclassical architecture
while still pulling off the kind of grand expressive gesture that Saarinen saw as essential,
given the use of the building.
Saarinen did not live to see the airport completed, as he died during
surgery for a brain tumor in 1961. Two of his associates, Kevin Roche and
John Dinkeloo, inherited the firm and supervised the construction of
Dulles Airport together with the engineering firm of Ammann and
Whitney and airport consultant Charles Landrum. Roche recalls the early
stages of the work, when all discussion of the appearance and structure of
the airport were held in abeyance for 14 months after the commission was
received while the functional scheme for the passenger concourse was
worked out. Any Saarinen staffer traveling by plane was under strict

orders to note the time taken to check-in, to walk


Dulles Airport, by Eero Saarinen, at
Chantilly, Virginia (1958-1962)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

to the departure gate, and to receive baggage at every airport they visited. According to
Roche, Saarinen always traveled with a stopwatch, methodically recording such details
and, invariably, reaching his gate at the last possible moment, “just to drive me crazy.”

Having boiled down the passenger data to produce an ideal plan, comprising the
concourse and mobile lounges, Saarinen brought in friends Charles and Ray Eames to
produce a documentary that was intended to help sell the airlines on the scheme. Airline
officials were not fully convinced by the ten-minute cartoon short, “The Expanding
Airport.” However, the CAA came down firmly on Saarinen’s side, alerted by the film to
the fact that the proposed 1000-foot-long pavilion concourse would have to stretch to
8000 feet if they opted for a conventional “finger-terminal” airport of equal capacity.
Their plan for the new airport approved, Saarinen and his design team embarked on
the search for a suitable form for its main pavilion. Dozens of sketches, now in the
archives at Yale University, show what a remarkable variety of shapes were considered—
rows of barrel vaults and of ziggurats as well as jagged roof forms, as if drawn by
Picasso. Ultimately, Saarinen looked back to his own work, on the cable-strung roof of
the Ingalls Hockey Rink (1959), built by the firm on the Yale campus in New Haven,
Connecticut. The hammock form that evolved for the airport pavilion has since been
celebrated to the point where the U.S. Postal Service printed a 20-cent stamp to honor the
building as part of a series in the 1980s dedicated to American architecture. Suitably, a jet
airplane is seen on the stamp, climbing into the sky (but in a direction perpendicular to
the runways, as if it somehow took off from the concourse roof).


Heralded as “The Temple of Travel,” the central pavilion itself appears to hover above
the flat plains of the airport runways. Approached by car, Dulles Airport can be seen as a
“Jet-Age Parthenon,” resting on an “Acropolis” created by the tiers of roadways stacked
up at its front. In its thrusting expressionistic posture, the pavilion is also reminiscent of
designs by Erich Mendelsohn, particularly that portrayed by his 1914 sketch,
“Architectural Fantasy.” In turn, Saarinen’s airport buildings (if not his mobile lounges)
have inspired imitation, as in Renzo Piano’s Kansai Airport (1994) at Osaka, Japan, and
in an airport design by Santiago Calatrava for Bilbao, Spain. That Saarinen knew that he
and his firm had created something special at Dulles is evident from comments made just
two months before his death: “I think this airport is the best thing I have done.... Maybe
it will even explain what I believe about architecture.” At the very least, he matched the
feat performed by his father, architect Eliel Saarinen, at the Helsinki Train Terminal
(1914) in Finland by likewise providing his country with a transportation gateway that is
a masterpiece of its genre.

DAVID NAYLOR
Airport and Aviation Building; Helsinki Railway Station, Finland;

Saarinen, Eero (Finland); Saarinen, Eliel (Finland)

Further Reading

Dulles International Airport was spotlighted as being among the last works fully
attributable to Eero Saarinen in the monograph by Allan Temko and in the compilation of
Saarinen’s remarks as edited by his widow, Aline Saarinen. Aline Saarinen also
participated, with Edgar J. Kaufmann, Jr., in a documentary film, “Eero Saarinen
Architect (1910-1961),” filmed largely inside the main concourse at Dulles and
distributed in 1967 by Columbia University Press. Since the 1960s, only infrequent
attention has been paid to the airport, despite its reputation worldwide.
Brodherson, David, “‘An Airport in Every City’: The History of American Airport
Design,” in edited by John Zukowsky, Chicago: The Art Institute of Chicago, 1996
Kaufmann, Edgar J., Jr., “Our Largest Airports: Dulles International Airport, O’ Hare
International Airport,” 44 (August 1963)

McQuade, Walter, “A New Airport for Jets,” 127 (March 1960)
Nakamura, Toshio (editor), Tokyo: A+U Publishing, 1984
Saarinen, Aline B. (editor), | New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1962;
revised edition, 1968
Temko, Allan, New York: Braziller, 1962
Tzonis, Alexander, Liane Lefaivre, and Richard Diamond, Boston: Bulfinch Press,
and London: Thames and Hudson, 1995

DUSSELDORF, GERMANY

As a German industrial and commercial center in the Prussian Rhine province,
Diisseldorf expanded rapidly in the last quarter of the 19th century, serving as the
banking and trading center for the heavily industrialized (Ruhr Valley) to the east.
Industrialization and continuous development as a trade-fair center shaped the city and its
architecture along the Rhine River. Noteworthy commercial and administrative structures
were built in the first half of the 20th century, but during World War II much of the city
was destroyed by Allied bombing raids. Although some prewar buildings were
undamaged or restored, a great deal of construction in the 1950s and 1960s transformed
the cityscape, with many notable achievements. In 1946, the Allied occupation
designated Diisseldorf the capital of the new state of Northrhine-Westphalia, and, as a
result, prominent new structures associated with state capital status have enhanced the
city’s architectural character.

Diisseldorf has long been a center for art and architectural study. Under the German
Empire, the city had two art institutions: an Academy of Art (Kunstakademie) and a
School for Arts and Crafts (Kunstgewerbeschule). Both offered courses in architecture
and design. The Kunstakademie continues to be a leading center for study. However, the
Kunstgewerbeschule closed in 1918, torn between the reformist and conservative
tendencies of the 20th century. The Kunstgewerbeschule was an important center for
aesthetic reform under Peter Behrens’ directorship (1903-07). A number of innovative
designers were attracted to the school, including Rudolf Bosselt, Fritz Helmuth Ehmcke,
and J.L.M.Lauweriks. Behrens was followed by Wilhelm Kreis, an architect with much
more conservative views. Kreis purged the school of Behrens’ appointees and ultimately
presided over the institution’s dissolution in 1918, an approach to the rivalry between art
academies and schools of applied arts mockingly referred to as the “Diisseldorf solution.”
Kreis continued to teach architecture at the Kunstakademie, where he had held a joint
appointment since 1913. Relatively unknown today, Kreis enjoyed fame and success in a
career spanning four German regimes: the Second Empire, the Weimar Republic, the
Third Reich, and West Germany. Through his teaching and commissions, Kreis strongly
affected Diisseldorf’s s architectural heritage.

Diisseldorf has a wealth of innovative buildings. German architecture between 1900
and 1914 was typified by bourgeois monumentalism, a stylized architecture that melded
Jugendstil (Art Nouveau) with historicism, serving as a bridge between 19th-century
historicism and the 20th-century search for new forms and ideas. One of the most
important Wilhelmine buildings is the Tietz Department Store (now Kauthof), built in
1907-09 to designs by J.M.Olbrich on a given floor plan. Together with Alfred Messel
and Wilhelm Kreis, Olbrich was one of the most influential architects of German
department stores. Olbrich used the colonnade and shop window front made famous by
Messel’s Wertheim store but added new sculptural interest to the roofline. Buttresses and
columns covering the steel frame served to unify the monumental exterior. Olbrich’s
four-part windows, running the height of the building, became a basic motif of German

department stores. The interiors and light courts were not restored after World War II
destruction.

Despite teaching for years in Diisseldorf, Peter Behrens designed only one building
there, the Mannesmann Building; it was built in 1911-12 after he left the city. Here,
Behrens sought to combine his interest in innovative design with the need for display
inherent in a corporate headquarters. Behrens’ building was inspired by Italian . On a
steel frame, he used rusticated stone for the foundation, dressed stone for the upper
levels, and a steeply pitched roof. The fenestration, geometric harmony, and horizontal
emphasis are typical of Behrens’ classical tendencies and were widely imitated. The
interior incorporated innovative engineering based on a system of pillars using a normal
module that allowed organizational flexibility. The module was a “normal office”: a six-
person desk with heater and office furniture. Even in the executive offices, all office
walls were movable partitions. The free treatment of the interior and the exterior
emphasis on blocky, objective forms were design landmarks in German corporate
architecture.

Poured-concrete construction and innovative brick Expressionist
architecture dominated the interwar period. Diisseldorf also became home
to Germany’s first skyscraper, the Wilhelm Marx House (1922-24) by
Kreis. The building included a stock exchange, shops, and administrative
offices. Concrete and elaborate brick designs alternate on the exterior,
culminating in geometric brick tracery crowning the tower and lending a
distinctive silhouette to the building. Another brick Expressionist building,
the Stumm Concern Headquarters (1922-24), was the work of Paul

Bonatz, the architect of Stuttgart’s Central Train Station.

Der Neue Zollhof (1999), designed by
Frank O.Gehry

© Uwe Schmid/CORBIS

The Stumm building drew on American examples to create a concrete frame decoratively
clad in bricks.

The most important interwar project was the Ehrenhof (1925-26), a group of buildings
designed by Wilhelm Kreis as part of the “GESOLEI” exposition, an event
combining elements of design show, amusement park, trade fair, and education fair. The
Ehrenhof itself was a group of four stylistically unified permanent buildings arranged
around a plaza: Planetarium (a multipurpose meeting hall), Economics Museum, Art
Museum, and Rhine Restaurant. The complex was intended to combine contemporary
architecture, sculpture, and landscaping ideas in an urban plaza that would serve as a
cultural center for social interaction and give closure and balance to the Rhinefront as
part of the city plan. On the whole, the Ehrenhof exemplifies Weimar design at its best
but also presages the monumental classicism of the 1930s (particularly during the Third
Reich) at which Kreis excelled. Flat roofs and horizontal lines dominate the museum
buildings, where stone foundations contrast with decorative use of brick and sculpture.
The Planetarium is a striking, circular building with brick arcades and a low dome
reminiscent of Near Eastern forms. Gutted by fire in World War II, the Planetarium was
restored in the 1970s as a concert hall.

Postwar Diisseldorf became a center for innovative architecture, and recent
developments sealed Diisseldorf’s s reputation as an architectural mecca. In 1960,
Diisseldorf received a new symbol in the Thyssen Tower, popularly known as the
“Dreischeibenhaus” (Three-Slab House), built in 1957—60 to designs by the firm Helmuth
Hentrich and Hubert Petschnigg. The nickname refers to its geometric conception as
three tall, narrow slabs. At a height of 95 meters with 25 floors, its steel-frame and glass/
aluminum-curtain-wall construction was a milestone for German corporate architecture.
Although its height and starkness were controversial, the tower was celebrated as an
emblem of German economic recovery.

Another subject of debate as a symbol was the State Parliament

completed in 1988 following a 1979 competition won by the firm of Eller,
Maier, Moser, Walter and Partner. The parliament features a circular
plenary hall surrounded by two multilevel wings and an interplay of
convex and concave rounded forms intended to symbolize the complex but
open nature of democracy. Nonetheless, the building’s monumentality has
been criticized for embodying a sort of economic hubris. Although a state
parliament, the building is larger and more imposing than the Federal

Parliament built in Bonn in the same era.

Diisseldorf continues to be a center for arts innovation. Museum Insel Hombroich is
an art environment, an innovative approach to museum conception located on an island
15 kilometers south of Diisseldorf in Neuss. The complex was begun in 1982 by Karl-
Heinrich Miiller, a real estate tycoon, and has been open to the public since 1986. There
is no single museum building. Instead, the island is conceived as a space for art in a
landscape shaped by Bernhard Korte. An art collection is housed in pavilions, or “walk-in
sculptures,” designed by Erwin Heerich. By 1997, there were 11 pavilions in a large park.
The concept behind the complex was to blend art and nature and to juxtapose ancient
Chinese, Persian, and Khmer art with contemporary works, allowing their merits to speak
to the viewer directly, without any signs or labels to identify the artworks. Heerich’s


pavilions also include ateliers and studios for artists in residence. The collection includes
work ranging from Rembrandt through Matisse to Alexander Calder.

The redevelopment of Diisseldorf’s s Rhinefront in the 1990s has also recently
attracted critical attention. Between 1993 and 1995, a major thoroughfare along the Rhine
River was rerouted into a tunnel. The goal was to reincorporate the river into the life of
the city by making space for terraces, parks, and cafes above the tunnel. The resulting
Rhine Promenade has been critically admired and popularly successful. The Promenade
combines paths with seating spaces and pools running roughly north to south from the
State Parliament to the Ehrenhof.

In a second project, the Rhine Harbor is being redeveloped to transform most of the
harbor area into office spaces, especially for multimedia firms. The “Media Harbor,” or
“Creative Mile,” combines retention of the 1896 harbor as a technological landmark with
experimental architecture by international leading architects, including Frank O.Gehry,
Steven Holl, David Chip perfield, and many others. It is frequently described as a
permanent architecture exhibit. In particular, Gehry’s Neue Zollhof office tower complex
(1999) broke new ground by making deconstructionist architecture potentially
economical. Gehry’s free-form shapes were adapted to mass-production methods via
computer simulation and poured forms in order to meet the builder’s engineering
demands. The harbor project promises to attract attention for several years to come.

TIMOTHY PURSELL
Behrens, Peter (Germany); Expressionism; Gehry, Frank (United States);

Germany; Olbrich, Josef Maria (Austria)

Further Reading

Gehry, Frank O., Essen: Verlag Peter Pomp, 1999
Heerich, Erwin, Stuttgart, Germany: Hatje, 1996
Mai, Ekkehard, “GESOLEI und PRESSA: zu Programm und Architektur rheinischen
Ausstellungswesens in den zwanziger Jahren,” in edited by Kurt Diiwell and
Wolfgang Kéllmann, volume 4, Wuppertal, Germany: Peter Hammer, 1984
Moeller, Gisela, Weinheim, Germany: VCH, 1991
Nerdinger, Winfried, and Ekkehard Mai, editors, Munich: Klinkhardt und
Biermann, 1994
Schepers, Wolfgang, and Stephan von Wiese, editors, (exhib. cat.),
Diisseldorf: Kunstmuseum Diisseldorf, 1984


E

EAMES, CHARLES ORMAND 1907-78
AND RAY KAISER EAMES 1912-88

Architects and designers, United States

Charles and Ray Eames believed that good design was a means to better living. With
their architecture, furniture design, films, and exhibitions, the Eameses sought to change
the way people thought about everyday objects and daily life. Using new, low-cost, pre-
fabricated construction materials, they set out to make good design inexpensive and
accessible.

Charles and Ray formed their professional partnership in 1941, the year they married
and moved to Los Angeles. However, all the work was submitted solely under Charles’s
name until 1947, at which time the design firm became known as the Eames Office. In
recent studies, feminist historians have attempted to assert Ray’s importance in the
partnership, claiming for her some of the recognition she did not receive during her
lifetime. Ray, who studied under Hans Hofmann and at the Cranbrook Academy of Art in
Michigan, contributed an abstract sculptural sense, an aesthetic refinement, and an eye
for detail to their design work. With two years of architectural training at Washington
University in St. Louis, several years in architectural firms, and some experience with
mechanics and manufacturing, Charles brought technical knowledge and engineering
skills to the professional partnership. The Arts and Crafts ideals of Cranbrook had a
lasting effect on the Eameses’ holistic approach to design.

The Eameses’ best-known and most influential architectural work is the house they
designed for themselves: Case Study #8 (1949). The Case Study House Program,
sponsored by the journal under John Entenza, was initiated in 1945 as a venue for
architects to produce innovative prototypes for postwar American living. Designed for
specific clients who were mainly professionals or the artistic elite, the Case Study Houses
focused on aesthetic and technological innovation. Charles collaborated with Eero
Saarinen on the initial plan for Case Study #8 in 1945; however, the design was
substantially revised by the Eameses before construction. Interested in the work of
European modernists Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, Marcel Breuer, and
others, the Eameses adapted the spare, functional machine aesthetic to their interest in
individual expression. The Eames House was the first Case Study House to use a steel
frame, and the innovative adaptation of prefabricated construction and industrial material
to residential architecture proved very influential. To the Eameses, a house was an
exhibition space for the occupants. Because the designs were published in and the


finished buildings were open to the public for six to eight weeks their occupation by the
clients, this architectural program was accessible to an extensive audience. Charles also
collaborated with Saarinen on a house for John Entenza, Case Study #9 (1949), which
was built on a lot neighboring the Eames House at Pacific Palisades. The Case Study
Houses came to define a new kind of Californian style, and the Eames House in particular
captured public attention and helped define the image of what was modern and American
in the postwar period, both within the United States and internationally.

Other notable architectural works include the showroom for the Herman Miller
Furniture Company (1949) in Los Angeles, designed shortly after the company began
manufacturing the Eameses’s furniture. Using steel-frame construction and a glass facade
of windows and opaque panels, the exterior of the showroom, as well as the concept of a
flexible interior space, was similar to the Eames House. Two unrealized competition
entries for public projects in the 1940s, City Hall (1943) designed with John Entenza, and
a proposal for the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial (1997), attempted to create a
spatial arrangement of elements that opened the channels of communication between
government and citizens. Projects from the 1950s include the Max De Pree House (1954)
in Zeeland, Michigan, designed for the son of the president of the Herman Miller
Furniture Company, and the Griffith Park Railroad (1957), which was a miniature
railroad station in a Los Angeles park. There were a number of other unrealized
buildings, including a house for Billy Wilder (1950), a project for low-cost mass housing
commissioned by the Kwikset Lock Company of Anaheim (1957), and a Birthday House
for Hallmark Cards (1959). They did not take on any architectural projects in the 1960s
or 1970s.

After 1949, the Eameses began to concentrate more on furniture design, toys and
decorative objects, films, and later exhibi- Office were commercially produced. The
Herman Miller Furniture Company began to manufacture, market, and distribute furniture
from the Eames Office in 1946, and the designs soon gained international recognition. As
in their architectural projects, they adapted wartime techniques and materials, such as
plywood, metal, and plastic (resin and fiberglass), to new purposes. Responding to
functional and technical challenges rather than market demand, the domestic, corporate,
and institutional furniture ranged from inexpensive and massproduced styles to high-
priced models.

Film, multimedia, and exhibition design appealed to the Eameses’s desire
to communicate ideas. Educational presentations were their specialty, and
they delighted in producing everything from independent films to further
the public understanding of science to films for corporate clients who
eagerly embraced the medium as a training and marketing tool in the
1950s and 1960s. (1959), a multiscreen film presentation about
everyday life in America, was commissioned by the U.S. Department of
State as part of a cultural exchange for the American National Exhibition
in Moscow. With this project,

Eames House, Santa Monica,
California (1949), designed by Charles
and Ray Eames

© Tin Street-Porter/Esto. All rights
reserved

tions. Between 1945 and 1978, more than 40 furniture projects designed by the Eames
Charles and Ray helped define the image of America to an international audience during
the Cold War.

For the Eameses, solving design problems was a way of making the world a better
place. While their architecture made an important contribution to the development of
Californian mod ernism, the functionalist philosophy that informed it contributed to all of
their design work. The Eameses wanted people to see beauty in the everyday, and in all
its forms, their design is a celebration of life.

SARAH BASSNETT
Saarinen, Eero (Finland); Smithson, Peter and Alison (England); Steel

Frame Construction

Biography

Charles Eames was born in St. Louis in 1907. He spent two years in the architecture
program at Washington University, and during this time, he began working for a large
architectural firm, Trueblood and Graf. In 1930, he and Charles Gray started their own
office in St. Louis, and then in 1933, Eames left for an eight-month trip to Mexico. After
a brief period with the Historic American Buildings Survey, his next venture was another
architectural firm, Eames and Walsh. In 1938, he went to the Cranbrook Academy of Art
to pursue a fellowship, and he stayed on to set up a design department. Here, he met his
life-long friends, Eliel and Eero Saarinen and Ray Kaiser. In 1941, Charles and his first
wife, Catherine Woermann, were divorced, and he married Ray. The same year, Charles
and Ray moved to Los Angeles to work on their own design projects, although in the first
few years, Charles also worked in the art department at MGM. In 1943, the Eameses
opened their office in 901 West Washington Boulevard. This is where the Eames Office
remained until after both Charles and Ray had died. The Eameses began designing
furniture in 1944, and in the 1950s and 1960s, they also produced a wide range of films
and exhibitions. Charles received many awards, including the AIA Gold Medal Award in
1957. He lectured at the California Institute of Technology from 1953 to 1956 and at
Harvard University from 1970 to 1971. He was also granted numerous honorary
doctorate degrees.

Ray Kaiser was born in Sacramento in 1912. From 1933 to 1940, she
studied with Hans Hofmann, first in New York, and later at the Cranbrook
Academy of Art. During this time, she was involved with the group,
American Abstract Artists. Ray and Charles met at the Cranbrook
Academy of Art in 1940, and they married and moved to Los Angeles in
1941. Between 1942 and 1947, Ray designed covers for and she began
to collaborate with Charles on a wide range of design projects. Together
they produced a vast body of work. Their partnership lasted until Charles
died in 1978. For the last ten years of her life, Ray continued her work at
the Eames Office, she gave public presentations of film and multi-media
projects, and she worked on a two books. Over the years, Charles’s and
Ray’s work has been the subject of numerous exhibitions, including a
retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1973.

Selected Works

Eames and Gray, Sweetser House, St. Louis, Missouri (1931)
Eames and Walsh, St. Mary’s Church, Helena, Arkansas (1935-1936)
Eames and Walsh, Dean House, Webster Groves, Missouri (1936)
Eames and Walsh, Dinsmoor House, Webster Groves, Missouri (1936)
Eames and Walsh, Meyer House, Huntleigh Village, Missouri (1936-1938)
Charles and Ray Eames, Case Study House #8, Santa Monica (Pacific Palisades),
California (1949)
Charles Eames and Eero Saarinen. Case Study House #9, Santa Monica (Pacific
Palisades), California (1949)

Charles and Ray Eames, Herman Miller Furniture Company, Los Angeles, California
(1949)

Charles and Ray Eames, Max De Pree House, Zeeland, Michigan (1954)
Charles and Ray Eames, Griffith Park Railroad, Los Angeles, California
(1957)

Selected Publications

Eames, Charles, “City Hall,” (May 1943)

, “City Hall,” (June 1943)

——.,, “Design, Designer and Industry,” (December 1951)

, “Design Today,” (September 1941)

, “The Exploring Eye: Sun Mill,” (February 1959)

——.,, “Language of Vision: The Nuts and Bolts,” (October 1974)

——,, “Organic Design,” (December 1941)

——,, “A Prediction: Less Self-Expression for the Designer.” (January-February 1960)

——,, “What is a House?” = (July 1944)
Eames, Charles, and Ray Eames, Los Angeles: Eames Office, 1958

Eames, Charles, and John Entenza, “Case Study Houses 8 and 9 by Charles Eames and

Eero Saarinen, Architects,” (December 1945)
Eames, Ray, and Philip and Phylis Morrison, Redding, Connecticut: Scientific
American Library and W.H. Freeman, 1982

Eames, Ray, John Neuhart, and Marilyn Neuhart, New York: Harry Abrams, 1989
Further Reading
Albrecht, Donald (editor), New York: Harry Abrams in association with the

Library of Congress and the Vitra Design Museum, 1997
Banham, Reyner, “Architecture [V: The Style That Nearly...,” London: Penguin

Press, 1971
Demetrios, Eames, An Eames Primer, New York-Universe Publishing, 2001
Kirkham, Pat, Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: MIT Press, 1995

McCoy, Esther, | New York: Reinhold, 1962; 2nd edition, Los Angeles: Hennessey
and Ingalls, 1977

Neuhart, John, Marilyn Neuhart, and Ray Eames, New York: Harry Abrams, 1989
Smith, Elizabeth A.T. (editor), Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990
Smithson, Alison, and Peter Smithson, “Eames Celebration,” special issue (September
1966)

Smithson, Alison, and Peter Smithson, London: Artemis London, 1994
Steele, James, London: Phaidon, 1994

EARTHEN BUILDING

Building in earth is one of the world’s oldest technologies, and traces of buildings
constructed in earth 4000 years ago still survive in the arid regions of the Middle East and
China. Its versatility (earth can be formed into building materials in at least half a dozen
different ways), its durability, and its economy have ensured its survival as a vernacular
building system in many parts of the world. The same qualities led to its revival in the
20th century in those parts of the world where the availability of suitable soils, the
prevalence of arid-zone climatic conditions, the high cost of industrialized building
materials or components, or the survival of a culture of building in earth have favored the
introduction of earth-based building materials and systems.

Of the several different ways of building in earth, monolithic earth construction, where
hand-formed balls of wet clay, with or without natural additives, are built up in courses
and left to dry and set, is probably the oldest and the most widely dispersed throughout
the world. Buildings in cob (Southwest England), in mud (Central Europe), and in swish
(West Africa) are a few of the many local vernacular manifestations of this method of
construction. Almost as old, and confined to the more arid regions of the globe is adobe:
sun-dried brick formed out of the local soil mixed with water, with or without natural
additives, and either hand-molded or cast in timber molds. In more humid regions of the
world, where timber is, or was, more readily available for building, wet clay was
commonly daubed onto an interwoven vegetal armature on a timber framework in
construction. (Although the term “daub” derives from the same Arab root as “adobe,” this
system is not indigenous in the arid-zone Arab homelands of the Middle East but was
prevalent throughout much of northwest Europe, and still is in many parts of sub-Saharan
Africa.)

A more complex technology is required to build in (rammed earth), where sieved
earth, dampened and with or without natural additives, is rammed into timber formwork
(normally made of timber planks), with the walls being built up in courses, and left to
dry. Of considerable antiquity, this method was common in the lands surrounding the
Mediterranean in the ancient Roman period (3rd century B.C. through the 4th century
A.D), and has survived in many of those lands to the present day. Equally ancient
examples have been found in Central Asia and China, where its use has also survived.

A more recent development is the manufacture of earth blocks in metal molds,
compressed under either manual lever arm or hydraulic pressure, and the similar
stabilized earth blocks, where a binding agent—cement, lime, or bitumen—is added in
small quantities to the sieved earth to give greater compressive strength and water-
resistance to walls built in these materials.

Although the use of these technologies is usually restricted to wall
construction, adobe and and monolithic earth are used in the construction
of roofs, whether flat, vaulted, or domed, and of upper floors. All these
materials and compressed or stabilized earth blocks are used in staircases

and paving.


Seger. |

Newly rendered private dwelling,
Djenne conservation project, begun in
1996 by the Dutch Government and
Mission Culturelle. The city is built
entirely in earth.

© Aga Khan Trust for Culture

Closely related to the above technologies are construction in sod or peat cut from the
ground—found in Ireland, Scandinavia, and North America—and blocks cut or molded
from gypsum—found in parts of North Africa and Arabia.

Inevitably, with increasing industrialization and urbanization and_ the
commercialization of building construction skills, by 1900 these traditional technologies
had fallen into disuse in the more developed countries of the world and were already
going down-market in the less developed countries (colonies of European metropolitan
nations and independent African, Asian, and Latin American nations). More damagingly,
traditional maintenance skills and practices were being neglected, and many traditional
vernacular buildings were falling into decay through neglect, with the result that earthen
buildings were acquiring a reputation for nondurability.

Several factors, however, led to a revival of interest in earthen building around the
turn of the century. First, among architects, the Arts and Crafts Movement in the United
Kingdom and National Romanticism and Regionalism in Northern and Central Europe
had popularized traditional building materials and construction systems: thatch and
shingles for roofs, for example, and earthen materials for walls. In the decade after 1900,
Edwin Lutyens and Charles F.A. Voysey in England explored the po tential of cob, clay
lump, and clunch in country houses, and in Hungary, Karoly Kos exploited the plasticity
of monolithic earth construction in country houses, most notably in the Artists’ Colony,
Godollo.


Across the Mediterranean, in Africa, the high noon of European colonial imperialism
was opening up the cultural heritage of the continent to European observers; not only in
sculpture, jewelry and textiles, but in vernacular building also. The vigor, spontaneity,
and decorative quality of African arts and crafts, increasingly extensively collected (or
pillaged) and brought to Europe by colonial officials and adventurers, led to a revolution
in the fine arts in the decade before World War I (1914-18): Cubism and Fauvism owe
much of their appeal and their power to their African sources of inspiration. The effect on
architectural formal and stylistic development was less early and less obvious. To French
colonial administrators and missionaries attempting to lay down the infrastructure of
colonial government and Christian evangelism in North and West Africa, the venerable
monuments of Africa’s precolonial past, almost all of which had been built of earthen
materials, provided obvious prototypes for their own rudimentary building projects. A
particularly notable example is the R.C.Cathedral of the Seven Dolours of Mary in
Navrongo, Ghana (1907-10), built by the White Fathers throughout, as are most of the
older surrounding mission buildings, in . Navrongo Cathedral is now a designated
National Monument in Ghana. British colonial administrators and missionaries were
generally not so venturesome, but a successful example of British colonial building in
adobe is the Kano Museum, in Kano, Northern Nigeria. The Anglican Namirembe
Cathedral (1913-19), designed by English architect Temple Moore, in Kampala, Uganda,
also contains much adobe brickwork in its interior walls.

The splendors of the monumental earthen architecture of Algeria, Morocco, and the
French Sudan were widely publicized in Europe, however, and the restoration in 1905 of
the ancient Great Mosque of Djenne, Mali, originally built in the 15th century of adobe
and monolithic earth, became a cause célébre among avant-garde architects in France. A
generation later, Le Corbusier paid tribute to the architectural and environmental quality
of the adobe and buildings of the ancient towns of the M’zab, in Algeria, in and
subsequently, in the dynamic, organic form of his pilgrimage chapel at Ronchamp,
France, for which the towns were a primary source of inspiration. In the outbacks of
Australia and South Africa, as the arid zones there were being opened up for colonial
settlement, earthen buildings were often the only materials available to the early settlers.
In both territories, sun-dried earth bricks were frequently manufactured out of termite
molds.

In the Americas, adobe was still a living tradition, and architects in the arid zones of
the United States were exploiting its plastic qualities in major buildings. The Fine Arts
Museum, Santa Fe, New Mexico (1917) by Rapp and Rapp, in a pastiche of vernacular
styles, was less innovative than the later house projects by Frank Lloyd Wright and
Rudolph Schindler in New Mexico and Arizona.

The collapse of the building industry in much of Europe in the aftermath of World
War I gave an added boost to earthen building. British Architect Clough Williams-Ellis,
in addition to designing and building in earthen materials on his own estates in North
Wales—most notably at Portmeirion—was largely instrumental in popularizing earthen
building through his book first published in 1919. In it, he convincingly advocated
the use of for utilitarian housing and industrial and agricultural buildings. A second,
amplified and updated edition, edited by J.C.Eastwick-Field, was published in 1947 in the
aftermath of World War IL, when similar economic conditions prevailed and a severe
shortage of conventional building materials led to a revival of the techniques advocated


by Williams-Ellis a generation earlier. By this time, however, national and local
governments had become major providers of housing—for the poor, the homeless, war
veterans, and refugees—and many examples of low-cost housing, in adobe, and later in
compressed or stabilized’ earth blocks, survive in all continents. An example of such
housing is the Queen’s Park Estate, in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, built between 1948 and
1953 by then-colonial government of Southern Rhodesia for returning war veterans and
immigrants.

Contemporary with this development was the pioneer village of New Gourna, near
Luxor, in Upper Egypt, designed by Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy to be built
throughout in adobe. At the time, this project was regarded as a failure because most of
the villagers from whom it was designed refused to move into the new village. New
Gourna itself, and Fathy’s advocacy of earthen building, was not widely appreciated until
some decades later, following the publication of his seminal work in 1973. Fathy,
however, was not alone in Egypt, a country in which there were many surviving
examples of adobe building, both from remote antiquity and in the present—for the
Nubian builders of Upper Egypt had retained the traditional skills and knowledge of their
ancient forebears—in advocating building in adobe. His enthusiasm and commitment was
shared by his contemporary, Wissa Wassef, who in the 1950s began building his magnum
opus in adobe, the group of buildings that eventually became the Ramses Wissa Wassef
Arts Centre, Harrania near Giza (1951-70).

The development of the CINVA Ram and other types of simple block-making
machines was a parallel response to the severe shortage of building materials after World
War IL the repercussions of which were as severe in the British Commonwealth and
European colonial countries and in Asia and Latin America as they were in Europe. The
pioneer work of developing the machine was carried out in Colombia, South America, in
the early 1950s, with the aim of producing a machine that was inexpensive to produce,
simple to operate, and easy to transport to the peri-urban areas of South America’s
rapidly expanding cities. Subsequently, the principles of design and production of
manually operated block-making presses was taken up by governmental and
intergovernmental agencies and nongovernmental organizations as a major tool in the
task of providing shelter for the homeless in all continents.

Meanwhile, in the arid-zone “sunshine states” of the United States, adobe had been
widely promoted as a popular and environmentally appropriate building material,
especially for housing and tourist facilities. In the earlier, midcentury phase of this
development, architects and builders sought to create buildings in a pastiche Indian
pueblo or Spanish colonial style, inspired by the surviving examples of the genuine
article in early mission compounds and Native American settlements. This adobe revival
had been gathering momentum for most of the century and had remained as much real
estate developer driven as architect driven. Fathy’s advocacy of the material since the
1970s has given all earthen materials a higher profile and a greater sense of authenticity
and architectural quality. This factor, together with the influential exhibition on “Des
Architectures de Terre” (Architectures in Earth) at the Center Pompidou in Paris, France,
in 1982, and the accompanying book on the same subject by Jean Dethier, has resulted in
a veritable avalanche of adobe and building throughout the warmer arid-zones of the
globe and in the construction of many examples of earthen architecture of high quality
that look well in the landscape and that provide an interior climate that is thermally

comfortable—comparatively cool summer and warm in winter—and economical to
maintain.

More innovative projects in the United States paid particular attention to the energy
conservation and thermal comfort potential of adobe buildings. More significant
developments included LaLuz Residential Estate, Albuquerque, New Mexico (1975),
designed by Antoine Predock. Both he and William Lumpkin, architect of several houses
in New Mexico such as the Balcomb Residence Santa Fe (1978), are architects who have
revitalized and energized the adobe tradition in the United States. Given the increasingly
high cost of energy, earthen building materials, which require little energy to produce,
and earthen buildings, which require comparatively little energy to maintain at a
comfortable temperature, are likely to retain their popularity and their prestige in the 21st
century.

ANTHONY D.C.HYLAND
Fathy, Hassan (Egypt); Great Mosque of Niono, Mali; Ramses Wissa
Wassef Arts Centre, Giza, Egypt; Wassef, Wissa (Egpyt)

Further Reading

Bourgeois, J.L., — New York: Aperture Foundation, 1996
Dethier, Jean, Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1982
Dethier, Jean, New York: Facts on File, 1983
Fathy, Hassan, Chicago The University of Chicago Press, 1973
Keable, Julian, — London: Intermediate Technology Publications, 1996
Linstrum, Derek, “The Architecture of the Twentieth Century: Africa,” in Sir Banister
Fletcher’s 20th edition, Oxford: Architectural Press, 1996
Williams-Ellis, Clough, London: Country Life, 1919; revised and expanded edition,
Shaftersbury: Donhead Publishing, 1999

EDGE CITY

“Edge city” is one of many terms used to describe the large, sprawling conglomerations
of commercial, retail, and residential development that proliferated along the beltways of
United States metropolitan peripheries in the 1980s. Coincident with the advances in
telecommunications, economic restructuring, and deregulation that began in the 1970s,
edge cities exemplify the privatization, decentralization, and dispersion of development
that is characteristic of digital media and the global economy. Joel Garreau defined five
criteria that characterize a fullblown edge city: “five million square feet of leasable office
space or more; six hundred thousand square feet of retail space or more; a population that
increases at 9 AM on workdays—marking the location as primarily a work center, not a
residential suburb; a local perception as a single end destination for mixed use—jobs,
shopping, and entertainment; and a history in which, thirty years ago, the site was by no

means urban; it was overwhelmingly residential or rural in character” (1991, 425). As of
1991, Garreau found 119 mature and 74 emerging edge cities in the United States.

Largely low-rise, low-density landscapes, edge cities typically evolve around suburban
spoke-and-hub highway intersections. The automobile access provided by these
intersections encourages the nearby development of office parks, regional shopping
malls, retail strips, franchises, and apartment complexes. Each use is visually and
functionally isolated from its neighbors by parking lots, united only by the heavily
trafficked arterial roads connecting them. Sylvan corporate campuses and gated
residential communities also follow this pattern, typically locating on cul-de-sacs off the
main arterials.

Suburbs initially used zoning to exclude industrial uses. New economies however,
replaced traditional manufacturing jobs with clerical jobs that posed less threat to health
and property values. Electronic media, meanwhile, reduced the need for face-to-face
communication. The information basis of much of the service economy, the expanding
suburban middle class, and the rise in automobile ownership further allowed many
operations to be moved to cheaper land on the urban periphery. Corporate headquarters
also often moved out of the cities to lush suburban estates to be closer to the executives’
homes and country clubs. These moves were aided by the interstate beltway system.
Initially constructed to allow through traffic to bypass major cities, beltways also
provided easy access to cheap, minimally administered land and proximity to the many
non-unionized and educated suburban women entering the labor force. In addition,
market deregulation, federal insurance, and the demand for greater financial returns in the
1980s encouraged lenders to speculate in real estate investment, much of it in the
booming edge cities.

The growth of edge cities reflects the general growth of U.S. suburbs. Between 1970
and 2000, suburbs experienced growth rates double and triple that of cities, accounting
for 60 to 85 percent of new construction, new investment, and new jobs. Suburban office
stock, for example, increased 300 percent during the 1980s, and by 1993 the suburbs had
half again as much office stock as that in cities. Similarly, declining urban populations in
the 1970s prompted large-scale retail stores to move to the booming suburbs. Although
population grew 10 percent in the 1980s, retail floor space grew 80 percent, mostly
because of the feverish construction of suburban shopping malls in edge cities.
Residential development has also migrated, as the declining real wages of the middle
class have encouraged the search for ever-cheaper housing at the periphery. In pursuit of
cheaper land, less-congested highways, and new markets, new edge city growth has
manifested itself in urban-sprawl patterns of ever-lower overall densities and ever-
escalating automobile use. In the 1990s, this prompted new urbanist efforts to reconfigure
edge cities into more compact, transit-oriented development as well as the Environmental
Protection Agency’s Smart Growth policies.

Other names for edge cities emphasize their various characteristics. “Exurbs” or
“urban sprawl” are popular and also emphasize distance from the city center. Richard
Louv’s (1983) early writing on the subject and his use of the term emphasized not
simply the physical distance from the city but also the deliberate way in which new
master-planned communities at Irvine, California, or outside Houston and Phoenix have
turned their backs on the city. By the late 1980s, the agglomeration of such developments
led to the coining of more terms. and Robert Fishman’s for example, emphasize these


regions’ participation in the digital economy, exemplified by California’s Silicon Valley
and Boston’s high-tech corridor along Route 128. The U.S. Congress’s Office of
Technological Assessment reinforces this role by its use of the term . Jonathan
Barnett has focused on the unplanned and haphazard process of their maturation; he cites
Tysons Corner, Virginia, as a prime example. A sleepy crossroads in the 1960s, by the
1990s Tysons Corner had two very large malls and as much office space as downtown
Washington, D.C., but no sidewalks and notorious traffic jams.

Edge city remains the most commonly used term, both for its simplicity and because
of the wealth of description and study given to it in Garreau’s definitive book as well as
in critical discussion that followed. However, Garreau’s unwavering enthusiasm for the
developers of edge cities as cowboy pioneers and innovative entrepreneurs responding to
new needs and desires has not been shared by many other authors on the subject. The
critics of edge cities find them banal, highly privatized, fragmented, and destructive to
both environmental and communal sustainability. Garreau dismisses such critics as elite,
moralizing snobs and raises the question whether the market responds to and promotes
individual freedoms better than planners and designers. The discourse on edge cities is
continuing to grapple with this and related questions.

ELLEN DUNHAM-JONES

New Urbanism; Suburban Planning; Urban Planning

Further Reading

Augé, Marc, Paris: Seuil, 1992; as translated by John Howe, London and
New York: Verso, 1995
Barnett, Jonathan, New York: HarperCollins, 1995
Beauregard, Robert A., “Edge Cities: Peripheralizing the Center,” 16, no. 8 (1995)
Downs, Anthony, Cambridge: Massachusetts: Lincoln Institute, and Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1994
Dunham-Jones, Ellen, “Temporary Contracts: The Economy of the Post-Industrial
Landscape,” _—(Fall 1997)

Fishman, Robert, New York: Basic Books, 1987
Garreau, Joel, New York: Doubleday, 1991
Koolhaas, Rem, “What Ever Happened to Urbanism?” and “Bigness” in Rem

Koolhaas, and Bruce Mau, edited by Jennifer Sigler, New York: Monacelli Press, 1995;
2nd edition, 1998
Leinberger, Christopher B., “Metropolitan Development Trends of the Late 1990s: Social
and Environmental Implications” in edited by Henry L.Diamond and Patrick F.
Noonan, Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1996
Leinberger, Christopher B. and Charles Lockwood, “How Business Is Reshaping
America,” (October 1986)
Louv, Richard, Los Angeles: Tarcher, 1983
Scheer, Brenda Case and Mintcho Petkov, “Edge City Morphology: A Comparison of
Commercial Centers,” 64, no. 3 (Summer 1998)
Sorkin, Michael (editor), New York: Hill and Wang, 1992

U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1995

EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS

Licensure of architects began around the turn of the 20th century as a means of enforcing
higher professional standards. At the turn of the century, architects could prepare for the
licensing exam by a variety of different educational and training experi ences; a few
schools existed for students with the financial means necessary to pursue a full-time
education. Students lacking this economic freedom could learn by working in architecture
firms, perhaps supplementing office training with evening studies. The traditional system
of apprenticeship decreased as formal education became recognized as an important
characteristic of the profession, and by the end of the 20th century, the educational
requirement for licensure has become nearly universal.

Professional regulation varies from country to country and, within the United States,
from state to state. Elements of preparation for practice presently include education,
internship, demonstration of competence by examination, and continuing education. In
the United States, an accredited professional degree, along with internship and
examination, is the gateway to both the title architect and the practice of architecture in
nearly all states.

There are some important differences in the various approaches to architectural
education around the world. An important issue for the architectural profession at the
beginning of the 21st century is the impact of globalization on preparation for
architectural practice. The countries of the European Community have recently
completed a survey of the national systems of higher architectural education in Europe.
The ability to practice throughout the European Community will require some greater
agreement on educational qualifications for architectural practice. The issue of
reciprocity between the United States and Canada is also under discussion. Within the
United States, the ability to gain reciprocal registration for practice in multiple states is
facilitated by a national system of accreditation for schools of architecture. A
professional body, the National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB), sets criteria for
education leading to a professional degree. The NAAB recognizes the variety of models
that exist for architectural education. Rather than regulating the type of school or
dictating curricula, the NAAB criteria establish areas and levels of learning for students
of accredited programs. In Canada, the Canadian Architectural Certification Board
(CACB) accredits schools of architecture.

According to data published by the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture
in 1994, there are 118 schools offering professional degree programs in architecture in
North America, with 108 of these schools in the United States and ten in Canada. There
are 199 schools in Central and South American countries, 63 architecture schools in
Africa and the Middle East, and 425 schools spread throughout Europe. There are 315
schools in Asia, mainly concentrated in Japan, the People’s Republic of China, South


Korea, the Philippines, and India. Australia has 19 schools of architecture and New
Zealand has two.

Institutional settings for architectural education vary. Within the university,
architecture may exist as its own school or may be a department of a comprehensive
college. Architecture departments may be organized under the umbrella of the arts, or
may exist within colleges of engineering, as in many Asian universities.

Architecture may also be taught within its own school independent of a university, for
example the Architectural Association School of Architecture in England or the Frank
Lloyd Wright School of Architecture in the United States. Architecture may be taught as
a discipline within an art school or may exist as a department of a technical school, such
as the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule of Zurich (ETHZ) in Switzerland or the
Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago in the United States.

The variety of settings for architectural education stems from the historic development
of the profession in Europe ranging from the first guild-based school for architecture in
Prague (established in 1353 for the court architect’s apprentices) to the Royal Academy
of Architecture founded in Paris in 1671, where a rational approach based upon the study
of classical architecture challenged the medieval traditions of the craft guilds. While
formal education for architects was developing in France, the office apprenticeship
remained the traditional English system for educating architects. In the early eighteenth
century, apprenticeship was replaced by the pupilage system in which students paid fees
for office instruction. Another type of architecture school, the Ecole Polytechnique, was
founded in Paris in 1795. The technical school became a model for architectural
education in German cities and in Prague, Vienna, and Zurich.

While the Polytechnic, where architecture was taught in a scientific context, became
the dominant model in the Germanic countries, French architectural education came to be
dominated by the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, which grew out of the French Academy, where
architecture was taught in the context of the arts. There were two parts to the Ecole
education, lectures on history and technical subjects at the school and design studies in
the or studio where a practicing architect served as patron to a group of students
working on design projects.

In the United States, the earliest forms of architectural education were borrowed from
British apprenticeship and French academic systems. The Beaux-Arts Society of
Architects, later the Society of Beaux-Arts Architects (SBAA), was founded in 1894 to
promote education. The SBAA issued programs for atelier students working under the
direction of patrons (practicing architects). The SBAA also provided the mechanism for
exhibition, judging, and publication of student work. In 1904, the SBAA established the
prestigious Paris Prize, modeled on the French Prix de Rome (Rome Prize).

American universities began to offer architectural education in the latter half of the
19th century; the first was the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in
Cambridge in 1865. By the turn of the century, architectural education was offered in 13
American universities including Columbia University, New York, Cornell University,
Ithaca, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, George Washington University,
Washington, D.C., and elsewhere. In Canada, the University of Toronto was the first, in
1890, to offer architectural education, followed by McGill University in Montreal.

The Beaux-Arts Institute of Design (BAID) was established in 1916 and incorporated
under the Regents of the State of New York to take over the educational functions of the

SBAA. The programs of the BAID were followed in schools as well as in the
independent studios. Atelier activity peaked around 1929. As the number of students who
worked by day and studied in the ateliers by night waned, the schools came to dominate
architectural education by the middle of the century.

New developments in Europe were transforming architectural education as well. The
state Bauhaus was founded in 1919 in Weimar, Germany; its program (developed
primarily by German architect Walter Gropius) applied modern or new materials and
industrial techniques to the problems of design, bringing together all of the arts and
crafts. The avant-gardism of the Bauhaus, its ideology and teachers, came under attack by
the Nazis; the faculty fled for France, the Netherlands, the United States and elsewhere,
eventually bringing Bauhaus modernism to American schools of architecture. In 1936
Gropius became chair of the department of architecture at Harvard University and his
colleague Marcel Breuer joined the faculty. In 1938, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe assumed
the directorship of the Illinois Institute of Technology; Laszlo Moholy-Nagy went to
teach at the Institute of Design in Chicago in 1937 and Josef Albers to Black Mountain
College, North Carolina in 1940. This influx of European architects came to dominate the
Beaux-Arts historicism of the American schools of architecture. The Beaux-Arts ateliers
withered as the university became recognized as the locus for the modern architectura
education. Following World War II, the G.I.Bill helped to make a university education
affordable for many Americans.
The entry of women into architectural education began with Julia Morgan, the first
American woman to attend the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. The first American schoo!
to teach architecture to women, The Cambridge School, was begun by Henry Atherton
Frost in 1915 to tutor women denied admission to the male bastion of Harvard
University. Although many American universities became co-educational, relatively few
women studied architecture until the 1970s. Women remain a minority in a number of
schools and women are under-represented on architecture faculties. Moreover,
architecture programs developed in several historically black colleges and universities in
America. Hampton University, then known as Hampton Institute, first offered course
work in architecture in 1889; Tuskegee University, then known as the Tuskegee Normal
and Industrial Institute, began offering Certificates in Architecture in 1893; architecture
degree studies began at Howard University in 1911. Today, there are seven historically
black colleges and universities with accredited architecture programs. People of color
continue to be under-represented among students and faculty in most American schools
of architecture.

A system of educational degrees developed within the university system. In the United
States, these include the (a bachelors degree awarded for an unaccredited education
focused on the study of architecture); and the (an accredited undergraduate Bachelor
of Architecture [B. Arch.] or an accredited graduate Master of Architecture degree [M.
Arch.]). Degree nomenclature and programs of study vary somewhat around the world. A
third type of degree is a offered to students who already hold a professional degree in
architecture. Post-professional education gives students the opportunity for specialization
and in-depth study in design, history and theory, technology, environment and behavior,
computer visualization, historic preservation, tropical architecture, or other fields of
interest. The post-professional degree may be a Master’s degree, a doctorate, or a Ph.D.


There are three possible courses of study leading to a professional degree
in architecture. 1) The student may complete a B. Arch program, generally
in five years. 2) The student may obtain a pre-professional undergraduate
degree, then complete a two-year professional M. Arch, program. This
option is generally known as the four-plus-two program. 3) The student
may obtain an undergraduate degree in any field, then complete a

professional M. Arch, program of three to four years duration.

The five-year Bachelor of Architecture degree was introduced at Cornell University in

1922. The four plus two program was introduced in the 1960s along with the possibility
of studying architecture exclusively at the graduate level. The diversity of paths to a
professional degree offers a variety of advantages. General studies help architecture
students develop into well-educated professionals capable of understanding the needs of
clients and the society. The B. Arch, program necessarily limits liberal arts courses
because of the many required professional courses. The four-plus-two program gives
students an additional year of study, freeing more time for liberal studies. The graduate
professional program gives students an opportunity to major in another subject in college,
then concentrate architectural studies into three to four years of graduate education.
Art courses, particularly focusing on drawing, are excellent preparation for
architectural education, which places a premium on visual communication. The ability to
draw expressively is considered to be more important to a beginning architecture student
than the mechanical skills taught in high school drafting courses. High school courses in
mathematics, at least including trigonometry, and in the physical sciences, are important
preparations for technical coursework in architecture. Writing and speaking skills are also
crucial for success in architecture school. A broad academic preparation is important for
the architecture student because the study of architecture draws heavily upon a variety of
disciplines. The basic components of the architecture curriculum are design, history and
theory, technology, practice, and general education. The various programs have
developed their own approaches, emphases, and strengths. Design studio integrates
material learned in the other courses.

The studio design education is an experience common to most architecture schools
and sets architectural education apart from other degree programs in the university.
Studio designates both a physical setting and a course of study. The studio is a second
home to the architecture student, who claims territory with a drafting table and often
personalizes the space with computers, partitions, cabinets, and domestic effects such as
sofas, refrigerators, and stereo equipment. Studio is generally conducted three afternoons
a week. Students are expected to work independently in studio for many additional hours.

Studio education follows the project method developed in France. The instructor
assigns a design project by means of a project statement outlining the parameters of the
project, carefully circumscribed to focus the students’ efforts on a particular set of
learning objectives. The project schedule helps students learn to manage their time to
complete work by the assigned deadline.

During a typical studio afternoon, students work independently, sketching, drafting
with manual equipment or on the computer, and building study models. The instructor
circulates around the studio giving individual criticism, often sketching on tracing paper
to explain ideas and suggest new directions for development of each student’s project. As


the deadline nears, students work around the clock to resolve designs, construct models,
and draft presentation drawings. This intense final effort is called the named after the
carts that were drawn through the streets of Paris carrying student projects to the Ecole
des Beaux-Arts.

The project culminates in a final review. Students present their projects individually to
a jury of faculty, sometimes augmented by visiting faculty from other schools, practicing
archi tects, and sometimes clients. The jury critiques the project for the benefit of the
assembled students. In the best of circumstances, the review is an important educational
experience, helping to prepare students for presentations to clients and review boards in
professional life.

History and theory are taught in lectures and seminars. A survey of architectural
history is common to architectural programs. Seminars tend to reflect the interests of
faculty, and theory courses may draw upon art history, environmental psychology,
phenomenology, sociology, and other disciplines.

Architectural technology includes structures, environmental controls, construction
materials and methods, and construction documentation. The emphasis on technology and
the extent to which technology is integrated into the design studio varies by program.

A course in professional practice generally occurs in the final year of study. Students
are introduced to the privileges and responsibilities of professionals, the legal and ethical
environment of practice, the myriad issues of managing practices, and project processes.

Architecture schools may offer opportunities to learn by working in architectural
offices. A few schools, such as Kansas State University, offer an internship program in
the fourth year of study. The University of Cincinnati, the Boston Architectural Center,
and Drexel University offer opportunities to pursue six years of concurrent academic and
work credits.

Architecture schools are staffed by full-time faculty who may concurrently practice
architecture and by adjunct faculty who teach part-time and maintain full-time practices.
Full-time architecture faculty generally have at minimum a Master of Architecture
degree, which may be a first professional degree or a post-professional degree. Some
subjects, for example history of architecture, tend to be taught by faculty with Ph.D.
degrees. Full-time faculty are subject to assessment by the same standards as other
university faculty, that is, evaluation based upon teaching, scholarly work, and service.
There is a continuing need for architecture faculty is to press universities to recognize
creative and professional work as credentials for promotion and tenure.

In the United States and Canada, architecture faculty are represented by the
Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture (ACSA). ACSA sponsors conferences
at the national and regional levels, providing venues for faculty to present scholarly and
creative work. ACSA publishes a quarterly journal, the as well as a monthly news
magazine. European faculty are represented by the European Association of Architectural
Education (EAAE). EAAE holds annual meetings, publishes a journal, and a newsletter.

In the United States, mandatory continuing education was pioneered by the American
Institute of Architects (AIA) as a means to distinguish AIA members from other
architects. The AIA requires thirty-six learning units of continuing education per year for
maintenance of membership. Learning units may be earned by attending educational
programs and conferences or by self-reporting a variety of educational experiences in a
broad spectrum of subjects. The state boards soon began to take up the idea of mandatory


continuing education as a requirement for renewal of licensure. The thrust of continuing
education for the states is keeping abreast of new knowledge in the area of health, safety,

and welfare.
MADLEN SIMON

Bauhaus; Bauhaus, Dessau; Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies

Further Reading

Detailed information on North American schools of architecture and contact information
for schools of architecture around the world may be found inthe —_. The
professional requirements. The Bannister, Bosworth, and Boyer studies examine the
status of architectural education at three points in the 20th century. Anthony and Cuff
describe the studio education and jury system.

American Institute of Architects, Washington, D.C.: Press for the American Institute
of Architects, 1920; 12th edition, as edited by David S.Haviland, 1994
Anthony, Kathryn H., New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991

Bannister, Turpin C., and Francis Rufus Bellamy, editors, 2 vols., New York:
Reinhold, 1954; see especially vol. 1,
Bosworth, Francke Huntington, Jr., and Jones, Roy Childs, editors, New York:
Scribners, 1932
Boyer, Emest L., and Lee D.Mitgang, Princeton, New Jersey: Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1996
Cuff, Dana, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1991

Drexler, Arthur, editor, New York: Museum of Modern Art, and London: Seeker
and Warburg, 1977
Hegener, Karen Collier, and David Clarke, editors, Princeton, New Jersey: Peterson

Guides, 1976; 4th edition, as Washington, D.C.: Association of Collegiate Schools
of Architecture Press, 1989; Sth edition, as edited by Richard E.McCommons and
Karen L.Eldridge, 1994
Mabardi, Jean Francois, and Renato Girelli, editors, Milan: Unicopli, 1997

EGYPTIAN REVIVAL

This architectural and decorative arts style is among the most easily identifiable of all
revivalist styles. Early Egyptian architecture has been studied, admired, and emulated
throughout time. The arch was used in ancient Egypt for what is believed to be the first
time, and the ancient Greeks considered Egypt the source of all civilizations. During the
Renaissance, Egyptian motifs were incorporated into the decorative arts, and many
architectural and decorative traditions to follow were influenced by Egyptian ornament.
For centuries, Egypt was inaccessible to foreigners because of its relative isolation and
strict religious and political restrictions. Early examples of the style were fanciful and

highly interpretive, with no effort made for accuracy until the 19th century, when
archaeological discoveries in Egypt captured the popular imagination. In 1798, Napoleon
initiated a military campaign into Egypt and sent numerous scholars and researchers to
excavate archaeological sites, resulting in a 22-volume treatise, (1829), a text that
would later become a major source of inspiration for designers. In addition, in 1799, the
Rosetta Stone, a basalt slab covered in hieroglyphics, was discovered by Napoleon’s
troops. Rubbings of the stone were made and sent to several European scholars, foremost
of whom was Jean Francois Champollion, who deciphered the hieroglyphics and
identified the Greek and demotic scripts inscribed on the stone. These events fueled a
further fascination with the Egyptian style, but a pervasive romantic interpretation of
these findings diluted its historically accurate application.

The Egyptian Revival style is expressed primarily in two ways—as a specific massing
with corresponding structural elements that evoke the architecture of ancient Egypt and
as decorative ornament that is applied to a conventional building. In the case of
architectural massing, each example of Egyptian Revival is configured with distinctive,
exotic features. Frequently, buildings in this style suggest the architecture of dynastic
Egypt in multiple ways—with battered (slanted) walls; columns that resemble bundles of
bound stalks with lotus, papyrus bud, or flowering blossom capitals; tall window frames
that mimic the battered walls and; an overall massing effect with heavy, thick walls and
strong, simple geometric volumes. In addition, an Egyptian Revival structure may include
an Egyptian gorge or cavetto cornice—a partially rounded, outwardly concave molding at
the roofline. Another common device is a pylon, a pair of towers with battered walls that
flank an entrance and is reminiscent of the monumental gateway into an ancient temple.
In terms of applied ornament, the Egyptian designs are incised or affixed, usually to the
surface of a fairly conventional building. The affixed elements are often in the medium of
terra-cotta. One of the most commonly used symbols is the winged sun disk flanked by
serpents, which represents the sun goddess joining the sun god Ra in his journey across
the sky. The disk symbolizes eternity, the wings serve as the spirit, and the serpents
represent wisdom. Another popular icon is the scarab beetle, which represents the sun
god and symbolizes life eternal.

There are limited examples of the Egyptian Revival style in Europe, but it
is a phenomenon found primarily in the United States, in cities both large
and small. The style became popular during the 1830s, the 1850s, the end
of the 19th century, and the 1930s, during the Art Deco era. During the
19th century, architects in the United States, most of whom had received
classical training in Europe, were attempting to assimilate the
conventional and classically academic architecture of Europe to the
different geography and available building materials of the country. It was
a time of great experimentation in the design and adaptation of popular
Greek Revival, neoclassical, and Renaissance styles. However, because
Egyptian architecture was not completely embraced by the traditional
vocabulary of academic and Beaux Arts architects, it remained a stylistic
experiment that was not popularized by a definitive school of American

architects. Nonetheless, architectural structures including jails,


monuments, cemetery structures, theaters, churches, and Masonic lodges
were built in this style, including Robert Mills’s Washington Monument
(Washington, D.C., 1833); Thomas U.Walter’s Debtors’ Apartments (built

1835, demolished 1968) at Moyamensing Prison in Philadelphia;
H.H.Richardson’s Ames Monument (1882), located near Laramie,
Wyoming; and Thomas

Paul Gerhardt’s Marmon Hupmobile
Auto showroom, Chicago (1910)

© Rima Krutulis

B.Stewart’s Medical College of Virginia (Richmond, 1845). Daniel Burnham and

John

Root’s Monadnock Building (1891) in Chicago is a remarkable 16-story office structure
built of traditional brick and mortar that evokes ancient Egyptian architectural forms in
its severe simplicity. It is a tall, narrow tower, devoid of all traditional ornament, that an

architectural critic once likened to a chimney.

American Masonic lodges, in particular, have had an interesting relationship with the
Egyptian Revival style, and many well-known architects were Masons. The Egyptian

Hall of the Masonic Temple (1873) in Philadelphia by architect James Windr:
heavily embellished, large, high-ceilinged room, and the Masonic Temple (19
Charlotte, North Carolina, by architects Hooks and Rogers, are two examples
theatrical aspects of this style provided a backdrop for the secret rites and cland
activities for which the Masons are known.

im, a
2) in
. The
lestine

In the 20th century, the Egyptian Revival style reached its zenith in the Art Deco era
of the 1930s. The development of polychromatic terra-cotta as a decorative architectural
medium and Art Deco’s abstract geometric design often manifested in quasi-Egyptian

ornament. The style was popular in the design of theaters and commercial buildings. The
best-known example of this type is the fully restored Egyptian (Ada) Theater (1927) in
Boise, Idaho, by architects Tourtelotte and Hummel. A good example of a commercial
application is the Reebie Storage and Moving Company headquarters (1923) in Chicago
by architect George Kingsley—an otherwise conventional building profusely ornamented
both inside and out with Egyptian design. Another example is Paul Gerhardt’s Marmon
Hupmobile Auto showroom (1910) in Chicago, an unexpectedly pleasing storefront with
a heavily embellished temple facade. A submission to the Tribune Tower Competition of
1923 by Alfred Fellheimer and Stewart Wagner, architects from New York, is a large
obelisk with clear Egyptoid references. Also noteworthy is the use of the lotus blossom in
a stylized Art Deco pattern incised above some of the Chrysler Building’s elevator cab
doors.

After the 1930s, very few structures were built in the Egyptian Revival style until the
1970s, when it resurfaced in the redesign of the entrance to the Louvre (Paris, 1970-77)
by I.M.Pei, in which a prominent feature is a pyramid structure. Also notable is the
design of the Luxor Casino and Hotel (1993) in Las Vegas by architect Vernon Simpson.
This massive casino/recreation complex incorporates a pyramid, a sphinx, and Egyptian
interior decor, bridging the distinction between revivalism and theme-based novelty that
has often typified this stylistic form.

RIMA KRUTULIS

Art Deco; Historicism

Further Reading

Carrott, Richard G., Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1978
City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development, Reebie Storage Warehouse,
Landmark Designation Report, September 1, 1999
Clichy, Bodo, New York: Viking Press, 1966
Curl, James Stevens, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994

EIGEN HAARD HOUSING ESTATE

Designed by Michel de Klerk, completed 1920 Amsterdam, the Netherlands

The Eigen Haard Housing Estate in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, consists of three
blocks of housing in the a residential district for workers that occupies approximately
54 acres in the northwest part of Amsterdam. Designed by Michel de Klerk (1884-1923)
between 1914 and 1920, this complex has been recognized as his finest achievement in
the field of housing, depicting his Expressionist style and ultimately becoming one of the
symbolic structures of the Amsterdam School.

Inspired by contemporary ideas that can be traced to the teachings of H.P.Berlage
(1856-1934), de Klerk was committed to the basic Berlage credo of “truth in

architecture” as expressed through the unity of spatial organization and material use. In
opposition to the abstract Cubism of the De Stijl movement, Berlage emphasized
experimentation with the artistic potential of practical solutions and the role of rhythmic
architectural forms in the evocation of moods, thus preparing the way for the
Expressionism of the Amsterdam School.

After the passing of the (Netherlands Housing Act of 1901), which encouraged the
sponsorship of low-cost housing, and the National Housing Council, founded in 1913,
which unified the large number of Dutch housing societies, the Amsterdam architectural
milieu between 1915 and 1930 involved extensive public housing. Although initially built
as low-rise, one- or two-family houses, Amsterdam saw a rising popularity in three- and
four-story apartment buildings that were built around communal courts. These (garden
villages) were based on the English Garden City movement and the principles of Briton
Ebenezer Howard (1850-1928).

Because the post-World War I building commissions were almost solely public
housing and because of the presumption that good housing was a means of elevating the
working class to a higher social level, architects of the Amsterdam School instinctively
became involved with the public housing projects. The first block of the complex was
commissioned by contractors Hille and Kamphuys, not by the Eigen Haard (One’s Own
Health) housing association, which commissioned the second and third building units. A
misprint in the Amsterdam School publication (Trends) in 1924 erroneously attributed
all three structures to Eigen Haard, and it has been thus reported ever since.

The four- and five-story first and second blocks, constructed in 1914 and 1915,
respectively, flank the — the small communal park. The third building, designed in 1917,
with its intimate (small public square) and characteristic spire, forms a triangular block
perpendicular to the earlier two buildings and across (East Zaan Street) and is similar in
concept to the first two but different enough to gain additional attention from his many
critics. The urban fabric is defined by the “urban block” consisting of the three-unit
cluster and their accompanying community square. The three blocks are articulated
differently, each with structural and decorative qualities that establish a specific character
that is enhanced by bold contrasts in shape, texture, and color. Examples of this
sculptural aesthetic can be seen through de Klerk’s eloquent use of brick and by the
apparent rigidity of the strong axial composition that is counterpoised by seemingly
arbitrary apertures, cylinders, cones, cantilevered balconies, textured planes, curved wall
masses, multi-paneled windows, and multi-angled roofs. The extraordinary range of
formal design variations elevated the buildings from simply housing construction to
works of art.

Detailing, technique, and massing distinguished de Klerk’s work from that of his
contemporaries. His creative and picturesque use of brick combinations, such as clinkers,
corrugated bricks, and regular bricks laid in a double-stretcher Flemish bond pattern, may
have reflected Berlage’s distaste for smooth-faced brick and stucco but not his belief of
honesty in materials. De Klerk did not feel that the simulated was deceptive but instead
believed that traditional effects of materials had a more enduring value and therefore
sometimes produced a hand-sculpted look with machine-made masonry units. Also, by
adroitly molding a diverse yet unified assemblage of housing units into these large-scale
blocks, de Klerk was able to further contrast with the lack of rhythm and the monotony of
the existing housing stock.


Following Berlage’s philosophy of architectural truth in the definition and enrichment
of the exterior spaces, de Klerk applied geometric emphasis on major spatial divisions.
Parabolic, curvilinear, and hemicylindrical forms define entrances, stairs, and window
separations, respectively, and decorative hoists indicate attic storage areas.

De Klerk’s lack of pretension in his artistic treatment of all building types, regardless
of their intended function or end users, gained him due respect by some of his colleagues
but especially with the residents of the Eigen Haard housing units. This
nondiscriminatory approach to design allowed those in the working class to also
experience the sculptural qualities of subsistence by enriching their perceptual
experiences.

Others felt, however, that this method of design was indeed pretentious. The
curvilinear forms were deemed illogical, the ornamentation embellishments were
criticized as structurally dishonest, and the overall design was thought to have no
connection to traditional architecture. Critics complained that his projects were too
opulent and wasteful, whereas others defended that the dignified dwellings were the work
of an “extraordinary artist” and showed a high degree of sophistication and therefore had
cultural significance and value.

Eliciting feelings from euphoria to nausea, the | complex became such a subject of
criticism that one critic went so far as to accuse de Klerk of creating details that were
“not only doubtful, but contrived, bizarre and unsound.” It was also said that the “total
design leans toward the ridiculous or the overrefined, and then towards decadent” (see
Gratama, 1915). Perhaps because of the publication of these comments in the widely
circulated the words “bizarre,” “individual,” and “decadent” became inextricably
linked to de Klerk and ultimately to the Amsterdam School as a whole.

De Klerk’s engagingly provocative design of the Eigen Haard Housing Estate
reflected his desire to solve each building problem independently with an unpredictable
artistic composition. Although once thought to have little in common with the major
monuments of the 20th century, this complex now stands as a monument itself for the
masterful artistry and audacious individualism of its architect who, because of an
untimely death, was not able to further develop these skills.

ELISABETH BAKKER-JOHNSON

Amsterdam School; Apartment Building; Berlage, Hendrik Petrus
(Netherlands); De Klerk, Michel (Netherlands); De Stijl; Expressionism

Eigen Haard Housing Estate,
Amsterdam

Eigen Haard Housing complex,
designed by Michel de Klerk, Building
#1, front facade

© Elisabeth A.Bakker-Johnson

Further Reading

Curtis, William J.R., editor, Oxford: Phaidon, 1982; Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall, 1983; 3rd edition, Oxford: Phaidon, and Upper Saddle River, New Jersey:
Prentice Hall, 1996

Frank, Suzanne S., Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press, 1984
Futagawa, Yukio, and Wilhelm Holzbauer, editors, Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita,
1980

Gratama, Jan, “Kroniek LXX,” 36, no. 33 (1915)

Whittick, Arnold, 2 vols., London: Crosby Lockwood, and New York:
Philosophical Library, 1950

Wit, Wim de, “De architectuur der Amsterdamse School,” in edited by Wim
Crouwel, Amsterdam: Stedelijk Museum, 1975
Wit, Wim de, New York: Cooper-Hewitt Museum, and Cambridge,

Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1983

EINSTEIN TOWER, POTSDAM,
GERMANY

Designed by Erich Mendelsohn, completed 1921

True to modernism’s precepts, the Einstein Tower in Potsdam, Germany, designed and
built by Erich Mendelsohn from 1919 to 1921, is one of the most unique expressions of
avant-garde architecture of the early 20th century.

Born in 1887, Mendelsohn was drawn to architecture at a young age. Like so many
artists and architects at the fin-de-siécle, he believed that a new era was dawning, and that
new forms of architecture were necessary for the modern epoch. In 1913 Mendelsohn met
the astrophysicist Erwin Finlay Freundlich; the two men discovered shared interests and
developed an enduring friendship. Freundlich introduced Mendelsohn to the then-
unpublished radical theory of relativity by Albert Einstein, ideas that would profoundly
influence European intellectual thought, as well as the visual arts, for years to come.
Freundlich; was interested in making observations that would confirm Einstein’s new
theory, and Mendelsohn sought to adapt Einsteinian principals to built forms endowed
with expressive plasticity. Unfortunately, both mens’ plans were interrupted by the
outbreak of World War I. In 1917, Mendelsohn was sent to the Western front.

During the war, Mendelsohn sketched continuously. These small sketches, in ink, of
factories and observatories are remarkable for their abstract forms and stark play of light
and dark. Mendelsohn began creating images of an architecture without reference to
history or style. He indicated in his letters to his wife that these images came to him as
fleeting visions that he labored to jot down before they vanished.

In 1918, Freundlich decided to build his own observatory in Potsdam where he could
explore and apply Einsteinian principles. He immediately sent detailed information to
Mendelsohn on the front. Early studies for the observatory for Freundlich are among
Mendelsohn’s sketches.

Mendelsohn began serious work on the Einstein Tower in May 1920. Construction
began in the summer of 1920; the exterior was completed by October 1921, and the
project was generally finished by 1924. The plan, in keeping with modernist reductivism,
was relatively simple; a vertical shaft was required down which light was reflected into a
horizontal underground observation chamber. The finished building consisted primarily
of a three-story tower supporting an observatory cupola, a ground-floor workroom, a
second-floor room, and the underground observation area.

However, the appearance of the structure is less like a device for scientific experiment
than like a ship, airplane, or vehicle of transport already in motion across the landscape.
The conceptual program was perhaps more complex than the functional one: Mendelsohn
consciously strove to make a design devoid of right angles, that was molded rather than
built, and that architecturally expressed the dynamic interchange of mass and energy
inherent in Einstein’s theory of relativity. For this reason, he emphasized the interplay of
mass and light, drawing on his impressionistic wartime sketches. The observatory was to
be constructed of poured-in-place concrete, the only material Mendelsohn thought
capable of expressing the dynamic possibilities of the new age. In the end, because of
cost considerations and material wartime shortages, the underground portion was built in
concrete, but the shaft of the tower was constructed of brick with a plaster finish.

The windswept form of the building reflects the conglomeration of a number of ideas
and influences. In part, Mendelsohn’s thinking had been influenced by the German
Expressionist writers and painters, such as Wassily Kandinsky, whose meetings he
attended. Kandinsky’s metaphysical exploration of a new German Zeitgeist shaped by
spiritual rather than rational forces proved particularly influential for Mendelsohn’s
architecture.

The organic vitality of Jugendstil interior design and architecture was equally
influential. Jugendstil (or German Art Nouveau) derived its sinuous and curvilinear
motifs from nature, particularly from vines and trailing plants, which suggested fecundity
and irrationality in their sensuous curving stems. The first-floor plans of the Einstein
Tower seem to be derived from Jugendstil organicism, as seen in the ovoid entry porch,
chrysalis-like stair chamber, and the curvaceous walls of the workroom, all of which
evince references to germination and plantlike growth.

Finally, Mendelsohn’s concern for energy, dynamism, and vitalism led him to the
ideas of the Italian Futurists and their manifestos, particularly to the work of artist
Umberto Boccioni. For example, Boccioni’s sculpture, of 1913—a virtual icon of
Futurist ideals of power, movement, and violence—would seem to echo in the sense of
undulating movement that is evoked by the curving walls of Mendelsohn’s Einstein
Tower. In particular, the swept forms of the legs in Boccioni’s soldierlike sculpture find
their way into the surrounds of the Tower’s first-floor windows, suggesting a kind of
protective cowling against movement through some medium, as if the building were
really a vehicle designed for travel.

The Einstein Tower became the most famous, albeit often misunderstood and esoteric,
German building after World War I. Despite the fact that Einstein himself referred to the
building in a private aside to Mendelsohn as organic, the architect’s intentions that the
building formally embody the physicist’s theories was not generally perceived. In his
later work, Mendelsohn continued to explore formal dynamism, but the work was much
more linear and rational, using steel and glass, brick, and concrete slab. He never built
anything like the Einstein Tower again.

The building functioned successfully as an observatory, yet its formal influence on
other architects seems to have been minimal. In this regard, it is a victim of its own
originality and uniqueness. It was a vision, but perhaps not visionary.

LAURENCE KEITH LOFTIN III

Art Nouveau (Jugendstil); Expressionism; Germany; Mendelsohn, Erich
(Germany, United States)

Further Reading

Beyer, Oskar (editor), | Munich: Prestel-Verlag, 1961; as translated by Geoffrey
Strachan, London and New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1967
James, Kathleen, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997
Stephan, Regina, Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje, 1998; as translated by
Melissa Thorson Hause, New York: Monacelli Press, 1999
Whittick, Arnold, London: Faber and Faber, 1940; 2nd edition, London: Hill, 1956

EISENMAN, PETER D. 1932—

Architect and theorist, United States

As an architect, writer, educator, and theorist, Peter Eisenman has consistently striven
to reveal the critical function of architecture. His commitment to maintaining architecture
as a critical practice has led him to adopt the role of architectural impresario, inciting,

supporting, and publishing the research and production of subsequent generations of
architects. Eisenman’s writings, most notably “Notes on Conceptual Architecture:

Towards a Definition” (1971), “The Futility of Obj
Classical, the End of the Beginning, the End of the
texts within architectural theory.

Eisenman was the founder and director of the are

ects” (1984), and “The End of the
End” (1984), have become seminal

hitectural think tank the Institute for

Architecture and Urban Studies (IAUS; 1967-82). At the IAUS, Eisenman was also one

of the founders and editors of | a seminal and
criticism. It was during this period as well that a 19
the Museum of Modern Art, New York, cited E

influential journal of architectural
69 CASE meeting and exhibition at
isenman, Michael Graves, Charles

Gwathmey, John Hedjuk, and Richard Meier as “The New York Five.” The Five, also
known as “the Whites” (because of their penchant for using pure white forms) shared an

interest in formal abstraction.

Studying under Colin Rowe at Cambridge U

niversity, Eisenman wrote a

doctoral dissertation (“The Formal Basis of Modern Architecture,” 1963)
that reflects Rowe’s influence; it also reveals how early it was that

Eisenman expanded formal analysis beyond

the purely compositional to

explore the structural possibility of architecture. He contributed to the
broadening of the discipline of architecture by turning to linguistics,
philosophy, and art theory; namely, Structuralism, Poststructuralism,
Deconstruc-tivism, and other approaches including the writings of French
philosophers Jacques Derrida, Gilles Deleuze, and Felix Guattari.

Eisenman, Peter (United States)
Wexner Center for the Visual Arts (1983-89), Ohio State University
© Kevin Fitzsimons and Wexner Center for the Arts

Between 1967 and 1980, Eisenman designed a series of houses that focused on revealing
the process of performing architectural abstraction. These houses, numbered rather than
named and documented with scientifically precise serial axonometrics, represented
research into the generation, transformation, and decomposition of architectural form.
The first four houses—House I (1967-68) in Princeton, New Jersey; House II (1969-70)
in Hardwick, Vermont; House III (1969-71) in Lakeville, Connecticut; and House IV
(1971, unbuilt}—examined within architecture what Noam Chomsky called “deep
structure”: a self-referential language devoid of semantic content. Beginning with House
VI (1975) in Cornwall, Connecticut, Eisenman moved away from the compositional,
transformative formalism of the early houses in favor of what he called a
“decompositional” approach, a strategy that focused more on relations and process than
on the formal qualities of the final object.

On founding his practice in 1980, Eisenman turned from the domestic to the urban
scale. The interest in the structure of the grid that had marked his houses was translated
into a horizontal-generating device in the Cannaregio Town Square housing competition
entry (1978) in Venice and the acclaimed Berlin Housing project (1982-86) in Berlin.
Eisenman’s first significant public building in the United States was the Wexner Center
for the Visual Arts (1983-89) at Ohio State University, which was the first project to
actively engage the ground plane. The Wexner can be understood as a constructed fiction:
a fragmented and reordered reconstruction of an armory tells one version of the story,
whereas another version is revealed by the gridded spine, which registers the discrepancy
between the campus and urban grids. The University Art Museum (1986, unbuilt) for
Long Beach, California, and the Choral Works/Parc de la Villette project (1986) in Paris,
designed with French philosopher Jacques Derrida, all illustrate an archaeological

approach by which historic or existing forms were taken from a site and then scaled
according to a fictive scenario.

If the transition from the houses to the artificial excavation projects can be understood
as a move from object to site, Eisenman’s subsequent career shift represented a turn from
Cartesian geometries to supple geometries. This transition, facilitated by computer-aided
design, was initiated with a series of projects that engaged the Deleuzian concept of
folding. In these works, most notably the Rebstock Park Master Plan (1991) in Frankfurt,
Germany, attention is still paid to the site, but the design solution is one of folding the
ground plane rather than extruding it. Here, the architecture and the site fold into each
other, creating a continuous sequence across the site, which throws into question
distinctions between horizontal and vertical. This manipulation of the existing site grew
even more complex with subsequent projects, such as the Arnoff Center for Design and
Art (1988-96) at the University of Cincinnati, which employed a dynamic, nonlinear
mathematical operation to produce a sinuous, torqued curve that, when juxtaposed with
the repeated Cartesian geometry of the existing building, creates what theorist Sanford
Kwinter has referred to as a “Piranesi-effect of unforeseeable complexity” (p. 13).

Recent projects, most notably the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences (1997-
present) in New York City and the Galicia City of Culture (2000—present) in Santiago de
Compostela, Spain, continue this Piranesian propensity. Derived from complex computer
technologies, the generated geometries are fluid and smooth, creating extremely graceful,
innovative forms. Although the computer has been instrumental in aiding Eisenman’s
generation of complex forms, it is even more significant for its role in shifting his
intellectual focus. If the early houses sought the critical within the performance of the
process, this highly complex current work cites the critical within possibilities of
performance; that is, within any aspect of the work, any possibility inherent to the work.
As he describes the Galicia City of Culture design, “[It] produces a new kind of center,
one in which the coding of Santiago’s medieval past appears not as a form of
representational nostalgia but as an active present found in a tactile, pulsating new
form—a fluid shell.”

Eisenman’s work continues to challenge the limits of architectural form and the
boundaries of architecture, landscape, and urbanism; meanwhile, Eisenman the
impresario continues to further the intellectual project of architecture through his
writings, lectures, and provocations.

SARAH WHITING
Color; Computers and Architecture; Deconstructivism; Institute for
Architecture and Urban Studies; Museum; Rowe, Colin (United States);
Poststructuralism; Structuralism

Biography

Born 12 August 1932 in Newark, New Jersey; received Bachelor’s degree, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 1955; Master’s degree in architecture, Columbia
University, New York 1960; M.A. and Ph.D. from Cambridge University, Cambridge,
England 1963. Irwin S.Chanin Distinguished Professorship, Cooper Union for the
Advancement of Science and Art, New York City 1967; taught at Cambridge University,

England 1960-1963; Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 1963-67, Established
Eisenman/Robertson Architects with Jaquelin Robertson 1980.

Selected Works

House I, Princeton, New Jersey, 1968
House II, Hardwick, Vermont, 1970
House III, Lakeville, Connecticut, 1971
House VI, Cornwall, Connecticut, 1975
Cannaregio Town Square (competition entry), Venice, Italy, 1978
Berlin Housing project, Germany, 1986
Wexner Center for the Visual Arts, Ohio State University, 1989
Rebstock Park Master Plan, Frankfurt, Germany, 1991
Amoff Center for Design and Art, University of Cincinnati, Ohio, 1996
Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, New York City, (1997- present)

Galicia City of Culture, Santiago de Compostela, Spain (2000- present)

Selected Publications

New York: Oxford, 1987
“Extra Edition: Peter Eisenman,” (1988)
Berlin: Emst & Sohn Verlag, 1991
London: Academy Editions, 1993
Mulgrave, Australia: The Images Publishing Group, 1995
London: Thames and Hudson, 1999

Further Reading
Bédard, Jean-Francois, Montreal: Centre Canadien d’Architecture and New
York: Rizzoli, 1994
Kwinter, Stanford, The Eisenman Wave, in Mulgrave, Australia: Images Publishing
Group, 1995

Krauss, Rosalind, “Death of a Hermeneutic Phantom: Materialisation of the Sign in the
Work of Peter Eisenman,” (January 1980)

ELDEM, SEDAD HAKKI 1908-1988

Architect, Turkey

Sedad Hakki Eldem was the leading proponent of a regionalist and tradition-conscious
modernism in 20th-century Turkish architecture. Born in Istanbul as the descendent of an
elite Ottoman family, Eldem spent his childhood in Geneva, Zurich, and Munich, where
his father served as an Ottoman diplomat. He studied architecture in the Imperial School
of Fine Arts in Istanbul (1924-28; the school was established in 1882 by his great-uncle
Osman Hamdi Bey), which was based on the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. After graduation, he
spent two formative years in Europe (1928-30), visiting the offices of Le Corbusier and
August Perret in Paris and working with Hans Poelzig in Berlin. His beautifully rendered
sketches, titled “Anatolian Houses,” dating from this period also reflect his fascination
with Frank Lloyd Wright’s prairie houses, which were inspirational for his own vision of
the modern Turkish house. In 1931, he returned to Istanbul to start his own practice and
joined the faculty at the Academy, where he taught continuously for 48 years.
Eldem’s architectural training at the Academy coincided with the end of the Ottoman
revivalist (or national style) in Turkey. By 1930, that style was replaced by the
International Style-influenced German and Austrian modernism of Ankara, the symbol of
the new Kemalist Republic. Critical of the academicism of the former and the forma.
sterility of the latter, Eldem posited the traditional Turkish residential vernacular as the
only viable source of a modern and national architecture. He devoted a lifetime to the
theorization, codification, and promotion of the “Turkish house” as a distinct cultural and
plastic type spread throughout the vast territories of the Ottoman Empire, especially in
Istanbul, the Balkans, and northern Anatolia. In 1934, he established the Nationa
Architecture Seminar at the Academy to study and document hundreds of such traditional
houses, which, he argued, already embodied modernist qualities in the rationality of their
floor plans and the constructional logic of the timber frame clearly manifest in their
facades. Although much of this material perished in the Academy fire of 1948, it
constitutes the coreofhis (1954; Plan Types of Turkish Houses) and his monumental
(1984; Turkish House), conceived in five volumes. In addition to these seminal works,
Eldem published numerous monographs on individual pavilions, kiosks, and houses of
Istanbul as well as a two-volume documentary of the city’s engravings and old
photographs.

Eldem’s early built works were largely private houses in Istanbul based on traditional
Turkish plans and displaying the characteristic tile roofs, wide overhanging eaves, and
modular repetition of projecting windows above the ground floor. These features became
his distinct personal style, which he elaborated in numerous private villas for wealthy
clients, mostly along the banks of the Bosphorous, well into the 1980s. In most examples,
the modular grid that acted as the generator of the plan, and the facade versus the in-fill
panels within the grid were distinctly articulated in different materials and colors. His
masterpiece, the paradigmatic Taslik Coffee House in Istanbul (1950; demolished in 1988


and rebuilt on an adjacent site), is a reinforced concrete replica of a 17th-century shore
mansion on the Bosphorous.

The larger and more monumental public buildings of Eldem’s early career were also
informed by his quest for a rationalist conception of modern Turkish architecture.
Working in partnership with Emin Onat and in close association with Paul Bonatz, Eldem
became the leading proponent of what was termed “National Architecture Movement” in
the 1940s, epitomized by the Faculties of Sciences and Letters of the University of
Istanbul (1942-44). This building is organized around a series of open courtyards and
displays the classicizing tendencies of the period in its use of monumental tall colonnades
and stone facing. The main facade is an elongated version of Eldem’s Turkish house idea,
blown up in scale and lifted above a monumental colonnade on the ground level with
clear allusions to Paul Bonatz’s Stuttgart Railway Station (1912-28). In the courtyards,
Eldem adopted the Ottoman walling technique of alternating brick and stone layers, also
used by Bruno Taut in the Faculty of Humanities Building in Ankara (1937-38).

The most acclaimed scheme of Eldem’s long career, however, was the Social Security
Administration Complex in Zeyrek, Istanbul (1962-64), which won an Aga Khan Award
in 1986. The program is skillfully scaled down and fragmented into smaller blocks, and
the scheme conforms to the topography of the triangular site sloping toward the old
neighborhoods of Zeyrek, with its narrow streets and wooden houses. In its sensitivity to
the scale and architectural character of one of the few remaining traditional
neighborhoods in Istanbul, the design marks the shift in Eldem’s attitude from the more
monumental nationalist classicism of the 1940s to a more contextualized modernism of
the 1960s.

SIBEL BOZDOGAN
Istanbul, Turkey; Social Security Complex, Istanbul; Turkey; Vernacular
Architecture

Biography

Born Omer Sedad in Istanbul, 18 August 1908; adopted family name of Eldem 1934.
Studied architecture, Academy of Fine Arts, Istanbul, 1924-28; traveled and studied,
Paris, Berlin, England, 1928-30. Married Fahire Hanim, 1941. Worked in the office of
Hans Poelzig, Berlin, 1929-30. Private practice, Istanbul from 1931; member, and for
several years chairman, Central Committee of Antiquities, Istanbul, 1931-41; member,
Central Committee for the Protection of Cultural Properties, Istanbul, 1941-45; member,
Council of the Monuments and Sites, Istanbul, 1962-78; member, Turkish Foundation for
Environmental and Historical Protection, Istanbul, 1978-88; member, Faculty of
Architecture, Academy of Fine Arts, Istanbul, 1930; created National Architecture
Seminar, Academy of Fine Arts, Istanbul, 1934; head of department, Faculty of
Architecture, Academy of Fine Arts, Istanbul, 1941-46; head, Design Bureau for Major
Projects, Ministry of National Education, Istanbul, 1944. Member, Union of Fine Arts,
Istanbul, 1932; member, Turkish Architects’ Union, Istanbul, 1934-54; honorary fellow,
Royal Institute of British Architects, 1946; member, Turkish Chamber of Engineers and
Architects, Istanbul, 1954. Aga Khan Award for Architecture 1986. Died in Istanbul,
Turkey, 7 September 1988.

Gercek, Cemil, and Leyla Baydar (editors), (Sedad Hakki Eldem: Large Residences),
Ankara: Yaprak Kitabevi, 1982

ELEVATOR

The invention of a safety device for the elevator made possible the construction of high-
rise buildings, thus enabling the traditionally horizontal city to turn to the vertical. In the
mid-nineteenth century hotels and commercial stores were among the first building types
to deploy elevators; with improvements in elevator technology, office buildings and
apartment buildings adopted them. As structural advances made possible taller buildings
new elevator technologies made possible easy and safe access to those floors.

Hoisting and lifting devices were long a common feature in mines, on building sites,
and for the loading of ships. Rarely more complicated than a pulley with a winch turned
by hand or animal, or later powered by steam, the particular danger of these early forms
of hoist was the absence of a safety device. Stretched or frayed ropes or cables might
break causing the platform to hurtle to the ground. The key invention that made the hoist
or lift safe for humans was a safety device that prevented free-fall disaster and its
inventor was Elisha Graves Otis (1811-1861).

Born in Halifax, Vt., the son of a farmer and part-time inventor, Otis left high school

and moved to Troy, New York in 1829 where he opened a sawmill and manufactured
carriages and wagons. In 1851 he moved to Yonkers, New York where he worked for a
bedstead manufacturer and while installing machinery in a new factory he developed a
hoist that incorporated a number of new features, including an automatic ratchet device to
hold the platform in place should the hoist rope break. He received a number of orders for
the device and to publicize it, held a demonstration at the American Institute Fair at P.T.
Barnum’s Crystal Palace in New York in 1854. While standing on a platform that was
raised to a height of thirty or forty feet above the ground he cut the supporting rope. As
viewers gasped the platform remained in place and Otis announced to the assembled
crowd, “All safe, gentlemen, all safe.” Though a relatively crude device—lugs were
driven into the platform when tension from the hoisting rope was broken—and the stop
abrupt, the device was effective.
The first orders received by the company were for freight elevators which were able to
exploit the steam power present elsewhere in the building to raise and lower the platform,
but on 23 March 1857 Otis installed an elevator in the new five-story china and glassware
shop of E.V.Haughwout and Company at 488 Broadway in New York. In addition to the
safety device demonstrated at the Crystal Palace, Otis installed a freestanding two-
cylinder belt-driven steam engine that enabled elevators to be built in buildings without
their own extensive special power sources thus enabling elevators to be installed in
buildings other than factories. (The Otis Company remains one of the largest
manufacturers of elevators today.) The first steam-driven elevator in Chicago was
installed in 1864 in the Charles B.Farwell Store at 171 North Wabash Avenue.

With the construction of tall buildings, notably in New York and Chicago, the need for
efficient elevators necessarily increased and engineers experimented with different types.


In 1859, a Boston engineer Otis Tufts built a screw-type elevator was built in the Fifth
Avenue Hotel in New York City. Tufts called his device a “vertical screw railway,”
effectively a large central screw, ninety feet long and 12 inches in diameter, which raised
and lowered the platform. Slow and relatively expensive, the screw-type of elevator also
had an unnervingly jerky movement. Another elevator type was developed by Cyrus
W.Baldwin for the Hale Elevator Company in Chicago. It employed a hydraulic system
that acted under water pressure and was first installed in the warehouse of Burley and
Company on West Lake Street in Chicago in 1870. The hydraulic elevator was
particularly effective in the highest of the new skyscrapers and was demonstrated at the
Eiffel Tower in Paris (1889).

Conversion to electric operation begun in the 1880s brought distinct advantages and
enabled the diffusion of the elevator to private apartment houses and smaller office
buildings. Traditionally elevators required a special operator, skilled at meeting the floor
levels, and opening and closing the gates. “Watch your step,” was the traditional elevator
operator’s call to passengers when he (or she) failed to meet the floor level exactly. But
electric operation, using push-button controls introduced first in the 1890s meant that
apartment dwellers themselves could operate the elevators. Electric elevators had the
advantage of clearing the basements of complex and noisy machinery. In New York, as
Cromley has pointed out, the electric elevator also helped introduce a new double-lot
sized flat building, typically of seven stories. Because of the elevator it was possible to
charge rents equably from floor to roof which not only compensated for the cost of the
elevator but made residents feel more secure: all fellow residents were of the same
income bracket.
Elevators were not only expensive to build but as building heights increased it became
ecessary to add more of them to expeditiously transport people to the upper floors. More
evators, however, consumed more of the floor plate, cutting down on rental income. In
rder to reduce this theft of space, experiments were also tried with double-height
evators stopping at even and odd floors. Staggered tubes with elevators running express
to a point one-third or one half of the way up the building, and with passengers required
to change elevators for local service for the remainder of the journey are commonplace
today.

In addition to its practical virtues, the elevator has also been a potent design symbol
for 20th century architects. Among Antonio Sant’Elia’s drawings for his (1914), for
example, was one project for an apartment house with the elevator projecting from the
slanted exterior of the building. This elevator served as a potent symbol of modernity. In
William van Alen’s Chrysler Building, in New York City (1930) the elevator doors were
decorated with hardwood veneers forming stylized flower patterns and the interiors of the
elevator cars were decorated with elaborate marquetry. The effect of the lobby and its
decoration was like a lush underwater world from which the elevators would speed one to
the light. Louis A.Kahn exposed the elevator shafts and covered them with brick, giving
them the character of medieval towers on the Richards Medical Research Laboratories,
Philadelphia, Pa (1957-64). In the 1960s exposed elevators on the interior of the building
became part of the kinetic pleasures of the atria built by John Portman in hotels such as
the Hyatt Regency in Atlanta (1967) and elsewhere. This form of exposed elevator has
been imitated, generally with rather baleful results, in shopping malls throughout the
world.

n
€
01
€

NICHOLAS ADAMS
Chrysler Building, New York City; Citta Nuova (1914); Grain Elevator;
Kahn, Louis (United States); Port-man, John C. (United States)

Further Reading
Cromley, Elizabeth Collins, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1990
Elliott, Cecil D., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1992

Landau, Sarah Bradford, and Carl W.Condit, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
University Press, 1996

ELLWOOD, CRAIG 1922-1992

Industrial Designer, United States

Craig Ellwood is credited with designing some of the most elegant modern houses
built in California in the 1950s and 1960s, but he was not educated as an architect. Born
Jon Nelson Burke, in Clarendon, Texas, Burke established in 1946 a small construction
company to take advantage of the house-building opportunities offered by the G.I.Bill.
To avoid any recriminations should the business fail, the company operated under the
fabricated name of “Craig Ellwood Inc.” The company did fail, although Burke retained
the name Craig Ellwood for professional reasons, adopting it legally in 1951.

Ellwood then worked as a cost estimator for a firm of modern-house builders in Los
Angeles, Lamport, Cofer, Salz-man, while operating from the same address as “Craig
Ellwood, Industrial Designer.” While there, Jack Cofer asked him to design his first
house, for Milton Lappin, in 1948. Although somewhat awkwardly planned and
derivative of Frank Lloyd Wright’s Sturges House in Brentwood (1939), it was
nevertheless published in the in 1950 and brought in further commissions which
encouraged him to set up, illegally, as “Craig Ellwood, Architect.”

In October 1949 the first house credited to Ellwood—the Broughton House—appeared
in followed by the Hale House (Beverly Hills, 1949). That year Ellwood also priced
the Eames House (Case Study House 8) for Lamport, Cofer, Salzman. The speculative
house he later built for Henry Salzman was published in —_ as Case Study House 16 in
April 1952, and with this building Ellwood’s reputation was ensured.

The qualitative difference between the Lappin House and the Salzman House is
noticeable. Ellwood had clearly learned something from Cofer, and probably something
too from Robert Peters, who drew crisp, modernist perspectives for him as early as 1950.

Ellwood’s houses were greatly influenced by the reductivism of Mies van der Rohe as
well as Charles Eames and Richard Neutra. Characterized by the use of exposed,
lightweight steel or timber framing, and by floating wall planes separated by a shadow-
line or “flash-gap” detail, they were spare, modernist, and invariably elegant. Recognition
came with Case Study House 16 and international success with the Maypole Apartments


(1953) which won the Collective Dwelling Category of the 1953-54 Sao Paolo Biennale.
Often formal in arrangement, sometimes symmetrical in plan, and frequently launching
into the landscape, Ellwood houses populated the more exclusive Los Angeles suburbs
and included the Zack House, Crestwood Hills (1952); the Anderson House, Pacific
Palisades, (1954); the Pier-son House (1954) and the Hunt House (1957), Malibu; the
Smith House, Crestwood Hills (1958); the Korsen House, Beverly Hills (1959); the
Rosen House, Brentwood (1962), and the Kubly House, Pasadena (1965). Overseas,
readers of | saw Ellwood’s homes as the epitome of Californian chic. It was in England
and Australia however that Ellwood’s influence was most keenly felt, his aesthetic
providing one basis for Hi-Tech architecture. What Mies van der Rohe had established as
purely aesthetic functionalism with the Farnsworth House (Piano, Illinois, 1950),
Ellwood had adapted into an accessible and fashionable vernacular architecture.

The Ellwood style translated less well in larger commercial buildings. Although the
South Bay Bank (Los Angeles, 1958) and the Westchester Post Office (1959) are
undeniably elegant, the Carson/Roberts Building (Los Angeles, 1960) misrepresents its
steel frame as an ill-conceived concrete structure. But at the Scientific Data Systems site
in El Segundo (1968), where the administration and manufacturing buildings are
pavilions in an open landscape, a successful industrial expression is found. Landscape
and architecture came together most dramatically in Ellwood’s last building, the Art
Center College of Design in Pasadena, California (1977), which was conceived as a huge
truss spanning a canyon, a final realization of a theme often repeated in earlier schemes
and buildings.

NEIL JACKSON
Eames, Charles and Ray (United States); Los Angeles (CA), United
States

Biography

Born Jon Nelson Burke, in Clarendon, Texas, 22 April 1922; raised in southern
California; drafted into the US Army Air Force in 1942; established small construction
company (1946) under the fabricated name of “Craig Ellwood Inc.,” the name Burke
adopted legally in 1951. Established his own office in Los Angeles 1948. Worked as a
cost estimator for a firm of modern-house builders, Lamport, Cofer, Salzman (Los
Angeles); shared an office with architect Emiel Becsky (1951-53); took graduate classes
in Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (1949-53). Employed
architects in his firm: Erie Jacks (1953), Jerrold Lomax (1953-62), Philo Jacobsen
(1961-63), Gerald Horn (1962-65), James Tyler (1966-77), some of whom became
Associates but not Partners. In 1977 Ellwood

Craig Ellwood House and patio Bel
Air, California

© Michael Freeman/CORBIS

closed his architectural practice, moved to Arezzo, Italy, where he died, 29 May 1992, of
an aneurism.

Selected Works

Lappin House, Los Angeles, 1948
Zack House, Crestwood Hills, 1952
Anderson House, Pacific Palisades, 1954
Pierson House, Malibu, 1954
Case Study House #16, Los Angeles, 1954
Case Study House #17, Los Angeles, 1955
Smith House, Los Angeles, 1955
Hunt House, Malibu, California, 1955
South Bay Bank, Los Angeles, 1958
Hale House, Beverly Hills, 1959
Korsen House, Beverly Hills, 1959
Rosen House, Brentwood, 1962
Kubly House, Pasadena, 1965

Art Center College of Design in Pasadena, California, 1977

Further Reading

There are no publications that cover the whole extent of Ellwood’s oeuvre. The other
sources shown here discuss Ellwood’s work in broader contexts and thus are more
general.

Banham, Reyner, London: Allen Lane, and New York: Harper and Row, 1971
Clausen, Meredith, “The Pasadena Art Center and the Curious Case of ‘Craig Ellwood’,”

664 (1999)
Jackson, Lesley (editor), London: Phaidon, 1994
Jackson, Neil, | London: Spon, and New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1996
McCoy, Esther, New York: Reinhold, 1962; 2nd edition as Los Angeles:
Hennessey and Ingalls, 1977
Venice: Alfieri, 1968; Santa Monica, California: Hennessey and
Ingalls, 1997

Pérez-Méndez, Alfonso (editor), “Craig Ellwood, 15 Houses,”
Slert, Charles, | Pomona, California: Cal Poly, 1978
Smith, Elizabeth A.T. (editor), Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989

McCoy, Esther,

12 (1999)

EMBASSY

Few buildings are more symbolically charged than an embassy, the tangible emblem of a
nation’s foreign presence. With complex programs, embassy office buildings, or
chanceries (not to be confused with ambassadorial residences), house diplomatic and
consular offices, some of which are open to the public and some not. They also host
numerous government agencies, including trade, agriculture, public health, law
enforcement, and defense. Thus, they serve many clients with varied agendas.
Historically speaking, no country has more expansively explored this building type as

a tool of cultural diplomacy than the United
own diplomatic architecture until the third

States, which, however, did not create its
decade of the 20th century. Embarrassing

comparisons between U.S. facilities and those of Germany, England, France, and Japan

and a feeling that independent wealth should

not be a prerequisite for diplomatic service

prompted Congress to pass legislation authorizing construction of the first foreign

buildings in 1926. Until then, American diplo:
diplomatic properties were either leased or
Tokyo (1931, Raymond and Magonigle) and

mats lived abroad at their own expense, and
acquired by gift. Impressive embassies in
Paris (1932, Delano and Aldrich) quickly

followed. Another, in Helsinki (1938, Harrie T.Lindeberg), was modeled after

“Westover,” an 18th-century plantation house

in Virginia.

Following World War II, America’s need for overseas office space soared, and the
State Department’s Office of Foreign Buildings Operations (FBO) embarked on a vastly

expanded building program financed initial

y by foreign credits. [In 2001, FBO was

reorganized and renamed the Bureau of Overseas Buildings Operations (OBO).] What

made the postwar embassies so striking was FBO’s daring decision to retain modernists
for high-profile projects in capitals such as Rio de Janeiro (1952, Harrison and
Abramovitz) and Stockholm (1954, Rapson and van der Meulen).

Critics in Congress reacted to the modern architecture and its International Style
association with dismay and called for a return to classical tradition. However, with the
Soviet Union building its own classically detailed embassies, FBO defended modern
architecture as an expression of American ideals. To promote its program, it created an
architectural advisory panel of experts in 1954. Spokesman for the panel, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Dean Pietro Belluschi, called for designs that were both
“friendly” and “distinctly American,” urging respect for local history, climate, and
context. Thus, embassies challenged architects to combine newness with perceived
tradition and to reconcile modernism with the uniqueness of place. Architects coveted
FBO commissions as opportunities to try out new ideas, sample exotic themes, and create
recognized monuments.

The period from 1954 through 1960 was the heyday of the American foreign building
program in terms of scope and the quantity of new work on the boards. FBO retained
promising young architects for projects in, for example, Kobe (1958, Minoru Yamasaki),
Accra (1959, Harry Weese), and Tangier (1959, Hugh Stubbins) and also turned to well-
known leaders of the profession for jobs in Athens (1959, Walter Gropius), Karachi
(1959, Richard Neutra and Robert Alexander), and The Hague (1959, Marcel Breuer).
Billboards for America and its foreign-policy aspirations, these prominent landmarks
welcomed the public with their libraries, exhibition halls, and other cultural attractions.

Edward Durell Stone’s design (1959) for the New Delhi embassy was among the most
memorable. Stone made a conscious effort to link his design metaphorically to Indian
tradition with a scheme that featured a pierced sunscreen and a temple-like plan. A
diplomatic success, the embassy was hailed as a symbol of American commitment to
India when it opened in 1959. Critical debate over the London building (1960, Eero
Saarinen) and congressional deadlock over the Dublin embassy (1964, John Johansen)
demonstrated clearly that embassy architecture was part of a larger political process.

As American facilities became targets of protest in the 1960s, security grew as a
concern. State Department officials considered the need first for perimeter fences and
then for walls. They barred architects from using devices such as sunscreens, limited the
use of glass, banned and eventually closed or relocated embassies, such as Accra, that
could not be secured.

Suicide bombings in Beirut in 1983 prompted a major security overhaul. In 1985,
Admiral Bobby R.Inman chaired a review panel that called for strict new construction
standards. Projects designed to meet the so-called Inman standards included chancery
compounds in Amman (1992, Perry Dean Rogers), Nicosia (1993, Kohn Pedersen Fox),
Santiago (1994, Leonard Parker Associates), Lima (1996, Arquitectonica), and Bangkok
(1996, Kallmann, McKinnell, and Wood). Some resembled prisons, whereas others were
slightly more welcoming, but the openness once associated with these unique public
buildings was lost amid escalating fears.

Bombings of U.S. embassies in Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam in 1998 reinforced opinion
that such facilities should not be sited in densely built downtown areas and that they
needed better protection. In 1999, FBO hired Hellmuth, Obata, and Kassabaum to design
replacement embassies for the two East African capitals. Both are landscaped walled

compounds away from traffic and away from other buildings, with structures designed to
look open but engineered to withstand a bomb blast.

The State Department finds itself caught in the same dilemma facing other
government agencies; namely, how to use design to represent democracy in a high-risk
world. This situation is particularly apparent in Berlin, where the State Department has
planned an embassy of great symbolic significance. The site faces the Pariser Platz and is
also bordered by busy streets, and it is almost adjacent to the city’s foremost monument,
the Brandenburg Gate. The site belonged to the United States before World War II and
thus holds special meaning today. As an indication of the project’s importance, FBO held
a competition (only the second in its history) and selected a winning scheme by Moore
Ruble Yudell, and Gruen Associates in 1997. The design accents America’s democratic
heritage through carved inscriptions from the Declaration of Independence and artwork
inspired by the American flag, but given security concerns, its interiors will be seen by
few. Moreover, lacking a security setback, the project has been delayed as diplomats,
politicians, and security experts agree on how to proceed.

Less targeted by terrorists, other nations face fewer design constraints. Canada’s new
chancery (2001) in Berlin, for example, boasts a prime location, and the building itself is
designed to be inviting and accessible. It houses embassy offices in a ninestory mixed-use
structure that also features a pedestrian arcade, shops, and rental apartments. With walls
of Douglas fir from British Columbia and floors of Quebec maple, and with a design that
conveys quiet strength, the embassy is an expression of Canadian national identity,
according to its Toronto architects, Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg. Another of
Berlin’s many new architectural attractions is the Nordic Embassy complex, for which
Vienna-based Berger and Parkkinen Architekten prepared the master plan (1999). An
unusual (and diplomatic) departure from tradition, the complex includes chanceries of
Denmark (Nielsen Nielsen and Nielsen), Finland (Viiva Arkkitehtuura), Iceland (Palmer
Kristmundsson), Norway (Snehetta), and Sweden (Wingardh Arkitektkontor), all
designed together on a single site.

Like the United States, Great Britain oversees a worldwide building program. London
architects Allies and Morrison garnered critical acclaim for the new British embassy
(1995) in Dublin, as did Jestico and Whiles for the British embassy (1997), a restored
historic villa, in Riga.

The extent to which security shapes embassy design varies, depending on who is
building, and where. In the United States, for example, where the host government can
provide dependable protection, foreign missions can build embassies that they could not
build where such protection is lacking. On Washington’s Embassy Row, Finnish
architects Mikko Heikkinen and Markku Komonen designed Finland’s chancery (1994)
as a glass-walled showplace for Finnish design and craftsmanship. If security concerns
the Finns, it does not show in their architecture.

U.S. Embassy, New Delhi, designed
by Edward Durell Stone (1959)

© Edward Durell Stone Papers (MC
340), box 119, photograph number
USE 94. Special Collections,
University of Arkansas Libraries,
Fayetteville.

Nearby, at the entrance to Washington’s Rock Creek Park, Italian architects Piero
Sartogo, Nathalie Grenon, and Susanna Nobili, in association with Leo A.Daly of
Washington, have designed an Italian embassy (2000) that combines the grandeur of the
past with modern sensibility. An homage to the Italian it is a major cultural statement of
Italy’s presence in the United States and features a spectacular glass-topped atrium,
brightly colored interiors, exterior walls of perfectly matched blocks of pink Italian
marble, and a display of Italian-made furnishings. Security is a priority, but the architects
have made a clear effort to downplay its impact.

No nation has a more prominent site in Washington than Canada, whose embassy sits
at the foot of Capitol Hill, directly across from the National Gallery of Art on
Pennsylvania Avenue. Canadian Arthur Erickson designed it in 1989 as a complement to
existing buildings in Washington’s Federal Triangle. Its formality and location
underscore the importance of U.S.-Canadian relations. The U.S. embassy (1999) in
Ottawa stands directly across from the Canadian houses of Parliament, making the same
point. Skidmore, Owings and Merrill designed the building to be “virtually accessible,” if
not actually so.

In Washington, numerous other nations have built smaller but no less distinctive
chanceries as part of the 28-acre International Center, an enclave of diplomatic buildings
northwest of downtown. The State Department helped these countries build modern

buildings by offering low-cost, long-term leases. Israel, Jordan, Ghana, Bahrain, Egypt,
Kuwait, Singapore, Austria, and Ethiopia are among those with embassies there, each
supposedly representing its own design theme. Ethiopia, for example, hired RTKL to
design an embassy (2000) that emphasizes the country’s history and hospitality and
makes use of its best-known building material: stone. Eventually, 19 chanceries will be
located at the center.

Through their foreign buildings, nations large and small, rich and poor, support
building programs that reveal their political, economic, and cultural ambitions. With
nations more globally interconnected, embassy buildings will remain singularly important
on the international landscape. Moreover, the threat of transnational terrorism makes
outstanding architecture evermore precious, as evidence of a commitment to a shared
future.

JANE C.LOEFFLER
Breuer, Marcel (United States); Gropius, Walter (Germany); Harrison,
Wallace K., and Max Abramovitz (United States); Kohn Pederson Fox
(United States); Neutra, Richard (Austria); Stone, Edward Durell (United
States); Washington, D.C., United States; Yamasaki, Minoru (United
States)

Further Reading

Few secondary sources deal with this building type. Loeffler’s provides a
thorough overview of the American experience and includes a selected bibliography. A
far more extensive bibliography exists in her doctoral dissertation (George Washington

University, 1996).
Huxtable, Ada Louise, “Sharp Debate: What Should an Embassy Be?” —_ (18 September
1960)
Loeffler, Jane C., “The Architecture of Diplomacy: Heyday of the United States Embassy
Building Program, 1954-1960,” 49/3 (September 1990)

Loeffler, Jane C., New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998
Sullivan, Joseph G. (editor), Washington, D.C.: Brassey, 1995
Therrien, Marie-Josée, “Au-dela des frontiéres, l’architecture des chancelleries
canadiennes, 1930-1992” (Ph.D. dissertation), Laval University, 1999
Tuch, Hans N., New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990
United States Advisory Panel on Overseas Security, Washington, D.C.: United
States Department of State, 1985
United States Department of State, Washington, D.C.: United States
Department of State, 1999
Vale, Lawrence J., New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1992

EMPIRE STATE BUILDING

Designed by Shreve, Lamb and Harmon; completed 1931

New York City, New York

The Empire State Building is arguably the world’s most famous skyscraper, and has
been since its completion in 1931. Although it relinquished the title of world’s tallest
building in the early 1970s, the Empire State Building epitomizes the commercial
skyscraper, a late 19th-century American invention that captured public attention and
imagination around the world as a symbol of America’s rise to global economic
preeminence.

The Empire State Building was the brainchild of two men: John Jacob Raskob, former
chief financial officer of General Motors, and Alfred Smith, former governor of New
York. In the late 1920s, Raskob and Smith decided to build the world’s tallest building as
a way to attract tenants to a midtown Manhattan site on Fifth Avenue that had been
owned by the Astor family. They began to raise money for their building in 1929. Raskob
and Pierre du Pont, the latter of the famous chemical family, were the main investors. The
project was entirely speculative, proceeding without a guaranteed “anchor tenant,” unlike
the Chrysler or Woolworth buildings. Raskob and Smith’s gamble was seriously
threatened in October 1929 when “Black Thursday” struck, inaugurating the Great
Depression just two months after the first public announcement of the Empire State
Building project. Construction continued in the hope that an economic turnaround was
near, but even after its completion in 1931, the building faced adversity. The Empire
State Building was only half full when it opened, and throughout the 1930s the
occupancy rate never exceeded 25 percent. Critics coined the nickname “The Empty
State Building” to describe the spectacular but barely used Goliath. The fact that the
building was able to survive these lean years adds to the Empire State Building’s fame,
just as its continued construction during the Depression made it a public symbol of hope
for better times ahead.

In 1929, Raskob and Smith enlisted the New York architectural firm of Shreve and
Lamb to design a 65-story building for the site. William F.Lamb, chief designer for the
project, created a building in the popular “setback style” to comply with the prevailing
New York zoning laws. These laws required a building to become thinner as it rose
higher; theoretically, a skyscraper could reach any height as long as it covered less than
one-quarter of its site. Lamb responded to the restrictions by creating a simple, elegant
building that gradually stepped skyward to a flat top. However, Raskob not only wanted a
towering skyscraper, he also wanted to trump corporate foe Walter Chrysler, who was
building a headquarters just blocks from the Empire State Company’s Manhattan site. In
August 1929, as the Chrysler Building was rising, Raskob’s dream of a 1000-foot, 80-
story tower had been announced to the public. Chrysler kept his architectural plans secret,
depriving Raskob and others of knowing just how tall his new building would be. As it
neared completion, Chrysler decided to add a needlelike spire to the top to bring the
height to 1048 feet. Raskob retaliated by ordering his architects (now Shreve, Lamb and


Harmon) to add six stories to the Empire design, making the building 1050 feet and
topping Chrysler by less than a yard. By December 1929, Raskob was insecure about this
slim margin of victory; the architects and engineers appeased him by proposing a 200-
foot dirigible mooring mast to crown the building. As constructed, the Empire State
Building’s 102 stories soared to a height of 1250 feet, just over 200 feet taller than the
Chrysler Building. Raskob had won the battle.

The Empire State Building was designed to satisfy the setback
requirements by rising in a series of ever-narrowing blocks. The exterior
was sheathed in Indiana limestone with a minimum of decoration.
Geometric designs in the aluminum spandrels and fluted stone comers are
the only ornamentation. The darkened spandrels are contrasted with light,
continuous mullions to em-

Empire State Building, designed by Shreve, Lamb and Harmon (1931)
© Museum of the City of New York Print Archives

phasize verticality. Although the Empire State Building’s attractive setback style and
amazing height draw the most attention, its interiors were equally impressive. The
building contained an incredible 2.1 million square feet of rentable space—almost twice

the amount of Manhattan’s second-largest building. The opulent lobby was a shining
example of Art Deco design, with marble walls; aluminum, platinum, and chromium
finish; reflected light; and a stainless-steel relief of the building against the outline of
New York State.

In addition to being aesthetically pleasing, the Empire State Building was a marvel of
construction. Its steel skeleton was state of the art for the period. More spectacular was
the speed with which the building was constructed—only 18 months passed from the first
sketches to the opening ceremonies. Actual construction was accomplished in an almost
unbelievable 11 months. The structural frame took only 25 weeks. Much of the praise for
this rapid erection goes to the organizational scheme developed by the general
contractors, Starrett Brothers and Eken.

On | May 1931, President Herbert Hoover pressed a button in Washington, D.C., and
the lights went on in the Empire State Building, officially opening the world’s tallest
building. During an opening ceremony at the building, attended by New York Governor
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Mayor Jimmy Walker, Al Smith aptly described the new
architectural wonder as “a monument for generations to come.” It stood tall and
unchallenged over midtown Manhattan, proudly proclaiming the triumph of American
corporate capitalism even on the verge of its darkest hours.

Despite the lack of tenants in its early days, the Empire State Building has been a
critical and popular success from the very beginning. During the lean years, income from
the popular 86th- and 102nd-floor observation decks helped keep the building open.
Beyond its place in the climax of the movie it has remained a tremendous tourist
attraction for over halfa century. The building became a cultural icon, symbolizing New
York and American prosperity and ingenuity. The Empire State Building lost the title of
world’s tallest building after a 41-year reign when the New York’s World Trade Center
opened in 1972, but it has never lost its mystique. The Empire State Building is the
archetypal skyscraper; although subsequent buildings have been built higher, none have
equaled it in grace and beauty or approached it in the public’s imagination.

DALE ALLEN GYURE

Further Reading
Bailey, Vernon H., New York: Rudge, 1931
Douglas, George H., Jefferson, North Carolina, and London: McFarland, 1996

“The Empire State Building: New York City,” 54 (1931)
Goldman, Jonathan, New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1980
Hine, Lewis W., Munich and New York: Prestel, 1998
James, Theodore, Jr, | New York: Harper and Row, 1975
Lamb, William F., “The Empire State Building: VII. The General Design,” 54/1

(1931)
Stern, Robert A.M., Gregory Gilmartin, and Thomas Mellins, New York:
Rizzoli, 1987
Tauranac, John, New York: Scribner, 1995

Willis, Carol (editor), | New York: Norton, 1998

ENERGY-EFFICIENT DESIGN

In the popular imagination, energy-efficient design has been understood to be a by-
product of the oil embargo initiated by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) on 19 October 1973. On that date, Western consumers of fossil fuels
became painfully aware of the energy-intensive nature of their built environment and
their fragile dependence on foreign energy sources. The practice of energy-efficient
design gained public recognition only after the related conditions of overconsumption
and scarcity became so dramatically apparent. The political drama of the mid-1970s,
however, only documents the prior suppression of long-emergent scientific doctrines.

The German physical chemist Rudolf Claustus (1822-88) was one of the first to
articulate the second law of thermodynam-ics, which he expressed in 1865 as the concept
of On the basis of his observation of thermal transfer, Clausius argued that one could
not finish any real physical process with the same amount of energy as that with which
one started. Once energy is expended, changing it from a usable form to an unusable one,
it cannot be replaced. In any closed system—such as our solar system—entropy measures
the amount of energy not available to do work. By the 1920s, this modern understanding
of basic physics prompted natural scientists to develop the doctrines of | These doctrines
express various ethical and economic imperatives to expend energy as efficiently as
possible, thus delaying the inevitable chaos associated with advanced states of entropy.

Despite the proliferation of neo-Malthusian predictions in the scientific community,
energy economics found little support among architects or in the realm of public policy
until the effects of World War II were realized by energy-poor nations such as Germany.
In the postwar era, concerns for the national security of energy-importing nations
stimulated numerous government-sponsored research programs intent on rationalizing
energy production and consumption. These pragmatic proposals for rationalization were
bolstered by the ideological proposals of the political Left. Marxists in general sought to
transform architectural production into a science capable of completing the modern
project.

In the United States during the 1950s, Victor (1910—) and Aladar (1910—) Olgyay
published research that reintroduced the concerns of biology, meteorology, and
engineering into architecture. This research culminated in the appearance in 1963 of the
influential . In 1968, the founding of EDRA (the Environmental Design Research
Association) documented the academic acceptance of the Olgyays’s scientific approach
to architectural design. This approach is clearly expressed by Buckminster Fuller’s
(1895—) Dymaxion Principle, which promotes maximum gain for minimum energy input.
In minds less energetic than Fuller’s, however, the principles of energy-efficient design
produced many projects distinguished only by low rates of energy consumption. The
relentlessly quantitative nature of the scientific approach to architecture eventually came
into conflict not only with traditional formalists but also with those intent on conserving
nature in other than instrumental terms.

The term was first used by the German zoologist Ernst Haekel (1834-1919) in his
of 1866. Although Haekel did not fully develop the scientific concept as it is understood
today, he did help popularize the notion that biological entities cannot be understood
outside their natural environment. He argued from a philosophically monist position that


is opposed to the Cartesian dualist assumptions of Western science. It is not surprising,
then, that the latter-day supporters of ecology, awakened by the 1962 publication of
Rachel Carson’s would reject a purely quantitative approach to the conservation of
nature. In their holistic view, the reductive assumptions of modern science are understood
to be the source of resource depletion and environmental degradation—not their cure.
Many historians argue that emerged as a somewhat romantic idea at the beginning of
the 20th century in Germany, England, and North America. Ecologism, however, did not
mature as a political idea until it merged with the concept of energy economics in the era
of the OPEC-induced energy crisis and the Vietnam War (1961-75). In that politically
divisive climate, the proponents of ecologism and those of economic development
clashed with increasing intensity. A significant contribution to the tentative resolution of
that conflict has been the concept of _ first used in “World Conservation Strategy,” a
1980 publication by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN). In that document, the seeming opposition of nature conservation and
economic development is subsumed in the synthesis of meaning “those paths of
social, economic, and political progress that meet the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” More developed
definitions, such as that proposed by the planner Scott Campbell in 1996, understand the
concept of sustainability to be a set of related but competing discourses in which the
economic interests evident in the socially constructed concept of energy efficiency are
balanced with the interests of environmental protection and social equity.

In Europe, the scientific—as opposed to the romantic—interpretation of sustainability
has been appropriated by the practitioners of the high-tech aesthetic, such as Sir Norman
Foster (1935—), Nicholas Grimshaw (1939-), Thomas Herzog (1941-), Renzo Piano
(1937), and the engineering firm of Ove Arup. In the 1970s, these designers were
concerned principally with the expressive potential of structure. At the end of the century,
however, their interests turned equally to the energy engineering problems inherent in the
environmental control of large buildings. Foster’s Commerzbank project (1994) in
Frankfurt, Grimshaw’s British Pavilion (1992) at the Seville World Fair, Thomas
Herzog’s exhibition hall (1995) for the Deutsche Messe in Hanover, and Piano’s office
building (1998) for Daimler-Benz at Potsdammerplatz in Berlin are significant works that
demonstrate the formal incorporation of energy engineering into architecture.

In North America, the concepts of energy efficiency and sustainability have been
associated more with the environmental impact of material selection and the reduction of
embodied energy in buildings than with expressive technology. The Croxton
Collaborative’s design for adaptive reuse of the National Audubon Society office
building (1992) in New York; the Advanced Green Builder Home (1997) by the Center
for Maximum Potential Building Systems of Austin, Texas; and William McDonough’s
proposal for the Environmental Studies Center (1999) at Oberlin College are equally
significant examples of how the concept of energy efficiency has evolved into a more
complex approach to the conservation of both natural and social systems.

In its most rigid form, energy-efficient design has been characterized as an attempt to
reconstitute the practice of architecture as a purely instrumental applied science. In its
most expansive form, however, energy-efficient design challenges society to understand
buildings not as static objects of aesthetic value but rather as dynamic entities that
participate in a complex system of natural energy flows and political consequences.


STEVEN A.MOORE

Further Reading

The literature that investigates this topic is spread between the disciplines of architecture,
engineering, economics, climatology, environ-mental studies, and physics. The titles
listed here are those related to architecture.

Bramwell, Anna, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1996
Campbell, Scott, “Green Cities, Growing Cities, Just Cities: Urban Planning and the
Contradiction of Sustainable Development,” 62/3 (Summer 1996)

Carson, Rachel, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962; London: Hamilton, 1963
Daniels, Klaus, Basel and Boston: Birkhauser, 1995; as translated by Elizabeth

Schwaiger, Basel and Boston: Birkhauser, 1997

Givoni, Baruch, Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier, 1968; 2nd edition, London:
Applied Science, 1976

International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Gland,
Switzerland: IUCN, 1980

Meadows, Donella H., Dennis L.Meadows, and Jorgen Randers, New York: Universe

Books, 1972
Olgyay, Victor, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1963
Watson, Donald, and Kenneth Labs, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983

ENGINEERED LUMBER

The most influential engineered wood products of the 20th cen-tury may be classified
quite simply as wood composites—recombinations of wood and wood fibers that
overcome many of wood’s natural limitations and extend its usefulness. Surpris-ingly,
however, in this century of rapid scientific progress, most of the notable new lumber
products have been rather modest steps forward—chemical improvements on essentially
mechani-cal 19th-century inventions.

Plywood, the trade name adopted by the Veneers Manufac-turers Association in 1919,
is a perfect example of a product that became truly viable only in the 20th century. The
industrial process of cutting thin layers of wood veneer by either peeling logs or slicing
them, along with the concept of adhering layers of veneer together, was first introduced
in France around 1830. Furniture makers such as Thomas Sheraton and the Steinway
company began using laminated wood veneers in the mid-19th century, and in 1884 a
factory in Reval, Estonia, began manufac-turing three-ply birch seats for bentwood
chairs. By 1870, a practical version of the rotary veneer lathe had been developed in the
United States. However, the development of a structural wood veneer panel that could be
used in everything from air-plane fuselages to wall sheathing depended on the discovery
of reliable, waterproof adhesives. That did not take place until after 1933, when German


companies began manufacturing a new type of synthetic, heat-activated resin glue.
Previous to the 1930s, plywood had been manufactured with a variety of other types of
adhesives, such as blood albumin glue, casein glue (made from milk curd), and soybean
glue, but its application was rather limited by its adhesives’ vulnerability to moisture and
light. Once these limitations were removed, plywood quickly replaced dimensiona
lumber as the most efficient material for flooring, wall sheathing, roofing, and concrete
forms.

Like plywood, the origins of glue-laminated timber lie in the 19th century. First used
in 1893 in Basel, Switzerland, glu-lam timbers are composed of many small, dry boards,
laminated together with glue and/or metal fasteners, to form extremely deep, long, stable
timbers. At first, glu-lam timbers could be used only indoors, where they would not be
exposed to harmful moisture or radiation. After the 1930s, however, new adhesives made
it possible to use glu-lam timbers practically anywhere. Glu-lam timbers have severa.
advantages over long single timbers cut from old-growth logs. First, they can be made
from much smaller logs grown in rotation. Second, because they are made from smaller
selected planks, their composition is highly predict-able. Third, they can be manufactured
to practically any size or shape. Glu-lam timbers have many architectural applications,
but their one weakness is their reliance on the strength and longevity of the adhesive.

Numerous new products have been developed on the plywood and glu-lam themes
since the 1970s. One is a composite wood joist manufactured in an I-beam cross section.
The web-bing is usually made from long sheets of plywood or oriented strand board, and
the flanges are made either from a parallellaminated plywood product called micro-lam
or from a material called Para-lam. The joists are much stronger and more stable than
traditional wood joists and are perfectly uniform. Naturally, they rely completely on the
strength of their glue bonds. Paralam is a type of glu-lam timber, but rather than being
made up of 2-by lumber, it is made of thousands of long, thin strips of wood
approximately one-eighth by one-half inch in cross section and up to a few feet in length.
In the manufacture of a Para-lam timber, a long bundle of spaghetti-like strands is coated
in glue, compressed as it is squeezed through gigantic rollers, dried by microwave, and
chopped off to convenient lengths. It can be manufactured to virtually any length or cross
section. In the United States, Para-lam is superseding traditional glu-lam beams in many
applications.

Not all engineered lumber requires chemical adhesives for its manufacture. One
product in particular, which was an essential part of America’s war arsenal during World
War II, was a com-pressed particle or fiber panel, often called Masonite or Hardbord. It
was manufactured throughout the 20th century out of many types of agricultural and
lumber waste and by many differ-ent processes. Ordinarily, sawdust or wood chips were
finely ground, boiled into a slurry, and then strained, pressed, and dried into hard sheets.
Fiberboard relied on the natural bonds between the wood fibers themselves for its
strength. Because it could be manufactured in practically limitless quantities out of
extremely low cost materials, it became popular for housing projects of all types both
before and after World War II. Partly for this reason, fiberboard has come to be
synonymous with temporary, cheap construction. Its extremely limited insulating
properties have also been far exceeded by fiberglass and rigidfoam insulation, and as an
interior finish it has been superseded in both cost and simplicity by gypsum wallboard.


Oriented strand board (OSB) is a recent variation on the fiberboard-panel theme and
has been on the market since the 1980s. In OSB, small, flat chips of softwood
approximately one to four inches in size are gouged out of waste scraps from saw-mills
and low-quality logs. The chips are mixed into a gooey resin and then are laid and
pressed flat in a hard matrix of resin and wood chips. Sheets of OSB are ordinarily cut to
four- by eight-foot panels and come in a variety of thicknesses. Particle-board is
manufactured in a very similar way out of sawdust. Both of these products are finding
wider use. Oriented strand board is an extremely inexpensive sheathing material,
although it is weaker and more moisture sensitive than plywood, and painted
particleboard takes an extremely hard, smooth finish for interior detailing and exterior
siding.

The engineered lumber products described here have been designed to decrease the
cost of housing and the use of scarce timber resources while increasing the reliability of
structural designs and the palette of architectural options. Unfortunately, many
“innovative” products, such as finger-jointed studs, cobble together pieces of poor-quality
lumber to create flimsy replacements for an already cheap existing product. Many
engineered wood products also require careful handling and can maximize their strength
and efficiency only if they are installed perfectly. Because the engineered timbers of the
20th century are composites designed to combine small, cheap, plentiful strips, scraps,
and planks into larger units, nearly all of them also rely on chemical adhesives, which can
release toxic gases and deteriorate under certain conditions. Despite these drawbacks,
there is no doubt that engineered lumber is the rational, ingenious, and optimal solution to
many of the environmental, economic, and political dilemmas that Western nations faced
throughout the 20th century and will certainly face in the 21st.

A.GORDON MACKAY

Further Reading
Elliot, Cecil D., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1992
Haygreen, John G., Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1982; 3rd edition, 1996
Jester, Thomas C., editor, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995
Schniewind, Arno P., Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, and Oxford:

Pergamon, 1989
Wilson, Forrest, “Wood: Holding Its Place through Decades of Change,” —-87, no. 2
(February 1988)

ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT
INSTITUTE OF INDIA

Designed by Bimal Patel; completed 1987 Near Ahmedabad, India

Commended by the Aga Khan Award for Architecture (1992) for the “confident use of
formal elements growing out of the Indo-Islamic architectural heritage,” the
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, designed by Bimal Patel, can be
conceived as a series of open courtyards and transitional arcade spaces that provide a
primary organizational framework for various scattered buildings. Situated on the
outskirts of Ahmedabad near the Bhat village, this institute is the outcome of an enterpris
ing collaboration between its director, Dr. V.G.Patel, and the architect.

The institute is formally organized as fragmented buildings that are laid out in an L
shape and unified by a system of corridors. It is entered through a plaza that is shaded
with trees. The entrance kiosk, with its green pyramidal roof, is the pivot from which two
axes extend. The first axis has the administrative offices and training and research centers
and ends in the library. The second axis has two sets of residential quarters, a kitchen,
and a dining hall and ends at the water tower.

The first axis proceeds straight ahead as one enters the kiosk. It has a reception area
off to one side and shows glimpses of the major courtyard, which sets off an austere yet
monumental looking residential building that has a gateway flanked by squat circular
towers at a distance. One is drawn through this axis that has alternating courtyards
extending from it on one side; these courtyards house the administrative part of the
complex, with research and training areas on the opposite side. It ends with a poetic view
of a plain exposed-brick wall that has a window set in it, framing the trees outside. The
library sits adjacent to this space. Staircases off this axis lead to the upper level, which
has a low corridor that follows the lower one on one side and is connected across to offer
views of the lower corridor and courtyards. The second axis, which leads to the
residential quarters, is interspersed with circular areas that look like squat towers from the
exterior and that are used for various activities, including indoor games such as table
tennis, and as sitting areas.

The buildings are constructed of exposed load-bearing brick and have reinforced-
concrete lintels and frames, with flat concrete and corrugated galvanized-steel roofs—all
materials that are associated with low-cost building. These materials have been
meticulously detailed with great refinement. The buildings are low, two-story structures
that are connected through corridors and walkways, which also surround the various
courtyards. The smaller courtyards are paved and have water bodies and trees that help
create shade and enhance the natural ventilation system, and the large courtyard between
buildings is landscaped with grass and has trees surrounding it. This project has been
extolled for its low maintenance, easy replicability, and concern for saving energy
through the use of courtyards for natural ventilation.

Although formally there is an aspect of monumentality that is emphasized by the
circular tower-like forms, by the framed views, and by the uniformity of courtyards (as


well as the materials used), this aspect is reversed in terms of the scale, as the buildings
are quite low in comparison with the scale of the courtyards they surround. In addition,
stepping-down devices on the roof accentuate the low scale. The formal alignment and
deflections that frame particular vistas are geared toward underscoring special areas of
the institute. The corridors that unify the institute contribute to the visual delight by
alternating between light and shade, with courtyards opening on the sides. In addition to
these corridors are alternate views of flat and arched lintels spanning adjoining courts,
staircases leading up to the walkways at the upper level, a variety of framed views at both
the upper and the lower level, and a rhythm in the arcades.

The project is greatly indebted to the vocabulary used by Louis Kahn in
the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad and can ultimately be

summarized as encompassing a

Entrepreneurship Development
Institute of India, Ahmedabad

© Aarati Kanekar

restrained and refined monumentality. It is noteworthy that this was the architect’s first
major commission.
AARATI KANEKAR

India; Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad

Further Reading

Bhatia, Gautam, “Indian Archetypes,” 1179 (May 1995)

Chauhan, M., “Spatial Experiences: Entrepreneurship Development Institute,
Ahmedabad,” 5/5 (July-August 1989)
Sabiki, Ranjit, “India: Significant for Its Vernacular Sensitivity and Its Simplicity,
78/9 (September 1989)

”

ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

Environmental degradation became an issue in those locales where citizens suffered the
unintended consequences of modern industrial development. In England, workers first
experienced the grim conditions associated with the Dickensian city in the mid-18th
century. In the rest of Europe and North America, the degraded industrial landscape
emerged by the mid-19th century, and globally such conditions emerged in the 20th
century. By the end of that century, the condition of the environment had become an
issue not only for the world’s industrial workers but also for an increasingly diverse
population who could no longer isolate themselves from the fouled water, polluted air,
and multiple health hazards that derive from industrial capitalism.

Historians and philosophers attribute the emergence of a degraded natural
environment to various sources. The historian Lynn White, Jr. (1907-), for example,
argued that the anthropo-centric assumptions of mainstream Christianity are largely
responsible for the instrumental view of nature held in those Western societies where
industrial capitalism first developed. It is that instrumental logic, according to White, that
has made nature appear to humans as available for exploitation and consumption.
Postmodern philosophers of nature, such as Arne Naess (1912-), construct a slightly
different narrative. Naess and the deep ecologists who followed him have tended to see
the origins of the degraded natural world in the foundational assumptions of such early
modems as the French philosopher René Descartes (1596-1650) and the English natural
philosopher Francis Bacon (1561-1626). Most historians agree that the Cartesian and
Baconian creeds became popularly accepted in Western society by about 1850. Although
this modern reconceptualization of nature became dominant by the mid-19th century, it
did not extinguish contrary views. The idealization of nature by the French philosopher
Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712-78) and the counter-modernism of the German philosopher
Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900) set the stage for the 20th-century reassessment of our
relationship to the natural world.

In the view of the German philosopher Martin Heidegger (1889-1976), the sum of
mainstream Christian and philosophically modern doctrines has been to institutionalize
what he describes as “modern technological thinking”—a form of consciousness in which
nature is understood as a static human resource or reserve. Heidegger’s influential
criticism of modern science and technology would resonate throughout the 20th century.

The reaction against modern environmental degradation predictably emerged in those
locales that were most affected by industrial excess—England, Germany, and North
America. In England, the Arts and Crafts movement, through the writings of John Ruskin
(1819-1900) and the socialist Utopian projects of William Morris (1834-96), articulated
a particularly nostalgic critique of industrialization. Those who followed Ruskin and


Morris—principally the architect Raymond Unwin (1863-1940) and the planner
Ebenezar Howard (1850—1928)—constructed progressive visions of urban life that
attempted to both rationalize and beautify industrialization in the form of the garden city.
In this tradition, English environmentalism has generally been associated with
progressive politics. However, architects such as C.F.A.Voysey (1857-1941) and Baillie
Scott (1865-1945), who enabled the retreat of industrialists to stylish houses in the as-
yet-unpolluted countryside, can be associated with conservative politics.

As with the English Arts and Crafts movement, the German and Austrian architects
saw a return to craft as the best defense against industrialization and environmental
degradation. The German Romantic attitude is exemplified by the self-consciously
picturesque Darmstadt artists’ colony designed principally by Joseph Maria Olbrich
(1867-1908). That village-like refuge from industrialization embodies the emergent
romantic environmentalism that became a powerful conservative force in the Wei-mar
era of Germany. Although there were Bauhaus- or Deutsche Werkbund-influenced
environmentalists, such as the landscape architect Leberecht Migge (1881-1935), who
affiliated themselves with progressive political causes, environmentalism in Germany
between the world wars was more commonly associated with the blood-and-soil rhetoric
of anti-modern nationalists and National Socialists. Architects of the Bauhaus, Hannes
Meyer (1889-1954) chief among them, did articulate various progressive positions
advocating the production of a hygienic environment for industrial workers.

In North America, those agrarian pastoralists who descended from Thomas Jefferson

(1743-1826) and Henry David Thoreau (1817-62) developed a two-sided critique of
industrialization: those who favored environmental preservation and those who favored
environmental conservation. On the side of preservation were those romantics, such as
John Muir (1838-1914), who advocated creating nature preserves that would remain
forever untouched by development. On the side of conservation were those pragmatists,
such as Gifford Pinchot (1865-1946), who advocated environmentally responsible
development. As these two camps matured under the New Deal administration (1933-45)
of President Franklin D.Roosevelt (1882-1945), social elites and technocrats came to
dominate both. The principal environmental concern of social elites was aesthetic, while
the principal environmental concern of technocrats was natural resource sufficiency and
balancing the accounts of energy economics.
Frank Lloyd Wright’s (1867-1959) organic approach to architecture emerged within
these debates. In projects such as Fallingwater—the Edgar J.Kaufmann house (1936) at
Bear Run, Pennsylvania—Wright’s careful attention to the integration of the building
with the natural conditions of the site, as well as his attention to solar orientation and to
the use of local materials, supports those who argue that Wright’s architecture is
environmentally inspired. Other historians, however, argue that Wright’s architecture
responded to the environmental consequences of industrialization in only a metaphoric,
not a material, sense. For example, Wright’s proposal for Broadacre City (1935)
exemplifies rather than critiques the American suburban attitude toward nature. It is the
consumptive quality of suburban American land use practices that has produced the
related environmental conditions of urban sprawl, universal dependence on the
automobile, carbonization of the earth’s atmosphere, and global warming—a cause-and-
effect relation that gained increasing credibility among scientists at the century’s end.


Following in the tradition of Wright, the organic architecture of Bruce Goff (1904—
82), Paolo Soleri (1919-), Herb Green (1929-), and Bart Prince (1947—) can be
characterized as profoundly anti-urban. Supporters of organic architecture argue that it is,
at the very least, a proto-environmentalist position. Detractors, however, argue that
organic architecture has achieved only the aestheticization of suburban life, thus masking
the environmental consequences of the American automobile culture. The growing
suburban population has tended to ignore the progressive environmental degradation in
North America until the mid-1960s. In the absence of public consciousness,
environmental issues were the concern of the poor who lived in the shadow of industrial
production, the technocrats who wished to manage it from above, and the social elites
who found it aesthetically unpleasant.

In the 1960s, however, several conditions conspired to change the political
complexion of environmentalism. First, the sanctity of science as an objective body of
knowledge came into question by such critical theorists as Herbert Marcuse (1898-1979).
If science could be understood as ideological and itself a source of environmental
degradation, Marxists found it increasingly difficult to distinguish between science and
the capitalist economy that commissioned it. Second, white middle-class citizens,
especially the so-called Woodstock generation, increasingly criticized the technocratic
capitalist economy because, like the poor, they too had begun to experience serious
environmental degradation. Following the 1962 publication of | by Rachel Carson
(1907-64) and the political confrontation of the Vietnam War (1961-75),
environmentalists of the Left, such as Barry Commoner (1917-), inspired a new
generation who embraced architecture as a medium of environmental and political action.

The critique of modern architecture that emerged in the late 1960s can be
characterized as having two fronts, one aesthetic and one environmental. On the aesthetic
front were those populists, such as Robert Venturi (1925—), who argued for a linguistic
approach to architecture. Those who followed Venturi’s aes-thetic critique, Robert
A.M.Stern (1939—) and Michael Graves (1934—) among them, became associated with a
popular historicism that was much appreciated by corporate clients such as Walt Disney
and the suburban developers of shopping malls. On the second front of the critique of
modem architecture were those lesser-known environmentalists, such as Steve Baer
(1938), who dropped out of conventional society to form alternative cooperatives, such as

in northern New Mexico. For example, Baer’s Davis house (1976-77) at Corrales, New
Mexico, employed a variety of passive solar techniques that enabled his client to live
independent of commercial power sources. Most of those activists who followed Baer’s
environmental critique of modern architecture rejoined conventional practice in the 1980s
and produced a body of architecture distinguished mostly by its energy efficiency. The
counterculture environmental architecture of the 1960s and 1970s was deeply influenced
by the “dymaxion” principles and geodesic constructions of R.Buckminster Fuller (1895—
) expressed through Utopian interpretations of both the future and the past.

In the 1970s and 1980s, postmodern environmentalists in Europe and North America
routinely characterized modern architecture as both inhumane and inherently anti-nature.
In this reactionary view, modern architecture, like the modern science and technology
that enabled it, was understood to be the principal source of environmental degradation,
not its cure. Under scrutiny, however, such claims appear to be ideological and reflect the
romantic assumptions of environmentalists in that era. More careful analysis suggests that

within modern architecture there is a continuous, if not constant, tradition of concern for
environmental issues, even among those major figures most often accused of abusing
natural processes. The California projects of Richard Neutra (1892-1970), the works of
Alvar Aalto (1898-1976), and even the later works of Le Corbusier (1887-1965) can be
understood as thoughtful attempts to design human environments in sympathy with the
natural energy flows of a particular site. Neutra’s Kaufmann Desert House (1946-47) at
Palm Springs and Le Corbusier’s experiments with natural ventilation at La Tourette
(1957-65) are particularly good examples that document the skill of modern architects in
addressing environmental issues.

It is such site-sensitive modern architecture that the historian Kenneth Frampton
(1930-) has described as “Critical Regionalism.” Frampton described a set of related
design attitudes that might provide resistance to both the globalizing tendencies of
modem technology and the repressive social codes associated with local building
traditions. To illustrate his hypothesis, Frampton pointed to the works of Mexican
architect Luis Barragan (1902—), the early projects of Swiss architect Mario Botta (1943—
), the houses of Australian architect Glenn Murcutt (1936—), as examples of sensitivity to
site and context. Frampton’s writings have generated a powerful proto-environmentalist
discourse that paved the way for the ecologically inspired architecture that appeared at
the end of the century.

Although the ecologically inspired architecture of the 1970s lost momentum when the
energy crisis of 1973 waned, it enjoyed a significant resurgence at the end of the century.
Under the rubric of green architecture and/or sustainable development, European and
North American architects produced a wide variety of projects that responded to the ever-
expanding list of environ mental concerns. The term “sustainability” was first used in a
1980 publication by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN),
“World Conservation Strategy.” Although the definition of sustainable development is
widely contested, the concept attracted a broad following in both developed and
developing nations by the early 1990s. In a 1987 publication by the UN World
Commission on Environment and Development, —also known as The —the concept
was defined as “development that does not destroy or undermine the ecological,
economic or social basis on which continued development depends.” Subsequent
international summit meetings on the environment—the first at Serrado Mar near Rio de
Janiero, Brazil (1992), and the second at Kyoto, Japan (1997)—vigorously debated the
political implications of sustainable development as a concept. The charged nature of the
international debate reflected the environmental and social effects of economic
globalization at the end of the century.

Although sustainable architecture had gained considerable visibility and support at the
century’s end, it would be a mistake to characterize it as a single, coherent ideology much
less a style. Rather, selected environmental issues confronting the late century gained
resonance with a number of competing and frequently opposed traditions within
architecture. Two British scholars, Simon Guy (1963—-) and Graham Farmer (1965-),
identified six distinct factors that characterize the concept of sustainability in terms that
are alternately progressive and conservative, high tech and low tech, romantic and
pragmatic. Guy’s and Farmer’s six categories (or “logics”) are particularly helpful in
relating particular environmental issues to distinct constituencies and include the eco-
technic, eco-centric, eco-aesthetic, eco-cultural, eco-medical and eco-social.

“Eco-technic” logic uses technologies to treat environmental problems. The term
defines projects of those architects and engineers who work at a global scale, relying on
the language of technology and scientific research. This type of architecture often appears
modem, commercial, and future-oriented; the architects employ “hi-tech,” and energy-
efficient construction methods, such as the photovoltaic production of electrical energy.
Projects by Norman Foster and Partners (Commerzbank Frankfurt, 1997), the Renzo
Piano Workshop (_ Lyon, 1995), or by the engineering firm Ove Arup exemplify an eco-
technic logic in architecture.

“Eco-centric” logic in architecture is focused on reconstructing a spiritual relation
between humans and nature. These architects envision the world as fragile and therefore
rely on systemic ecology and other holistic approaches as a source of environmental
knowledge. Eco-centric buildings are understood to be consumptive, but can be redeemed
through employing such renewable technologies as straw-bale construction. The natural
harmony envisioned by those who support eco-centric architecture is exemplified by the
projects of Brenda (1949-) and Robert Vale (1948—) in the United Kingdom (the
Autonomous House, 1975) and by the “Earthships” (1983-90) of Mike Reynolds (1945-)
in New Mexico.

“Eco-aesthetic” logic in architecture is less concerned with energy efficiency and the
sanctity of nature than with metaphor and meaning. This group of architects prizes
iconicity, organics, and a non-linear approach to design. In this characterization of
sustainable architecture, human consciousness of nature is transformed as much by
organic expressionism as by new ecolog-ical knowledge. Eco-aesthetic architecture is
exemplified by the dramatic concrete constructions of Santiago Calatrava (1951-), the
fusion of landscape and architecture found in the works of SITE, and the complex
organic forms of Frank Gehry (1929-).

“Eco-cultural” logic involves the local cultural consequences of global technological
change. Space, in this tradition, is understood as phenomenological and bioregionally
unique. Typologically appropriate constructions are generally realized through “passive,”
“low-tech,” or “vernacular” technologies, such as adobe construction, that focus cultural
practices. Exemplars of eco-cultural logic, however, include the technologically inventive
houses of Glenn Murcutt (1936—) in Australia, the works of Charles Correa (1930-) in
India, and the midcentury works of Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy (1900-89).

“Eco-medical” logic is concerned principally with medical and health issues.
According to the eco-medical, the modern built environment is characterized as polluted
and even hazardous—the consequence of “sick building syndrome” that results from the
use of volatile chemical compounds in tightly constructed buildings coupled with
inadequate natural ventilation. The technologies employed by the practitioners of eco-
medical logic are “passive, nontoxic, natural, or tactile,” and are deployed to ensure
individual health and well-being. The (building biology) movement in Germany and the
Gaia group in Norway are practitioners of eco-medical logic.

The final environmental logic identified by Guy and Farmer is the “eco-social,” which
concerns itself with social participation in reproducing those natural processes that
enhance all life. In this tradition, ecological space can be interpreted only in the social
context of power relations. One cannot consider the health of the forest, for example,
without also considering the health of forest workers. Eco-social design, then, relies on
sociology and social ecology in architecture construction that is democratic, participatory,


and locally managed. In the United Kingdom, Ralph Erskine (1914—) has employed eco-
social logic in most of his projects, as have Lucien Kroll (1927—) in Belgium and Peter
Hubner (1939-) in Germany.
Each of the environmental logics identified by Guy and Farmer concern themselves
with a different set of environmental issues and attract citizens with differing political
and economic interests. There is, of course, considerable fluidity in the ideological
boundaries described in these various logics, but it is less the exclusive quality of the
categories that is important than the diversity of those citizens who are attracted to them.
Indeed, by the year 2000, the degraded condition of the environment had become a
significant issue not only to exploited workers but also to average citizens in every
country. On this account, a new breed of environmental activists exemplified by the
industrialist Paul Hawken (1946—) and the co-directors of the Rocky Mountain Institute,
Amory (1947—-) and Hunter Lovins (1950-), predict that environmentally inspired
technology will come to dominate architectural production in the 21st century.
STEVEN A.MOORE
Barragan, Luis (Mexico); Foster, Norman (England); Fuller, Richard
Buckminster (United States); Goff, Bruce (United States); Neutra, Richard
(Austria); Stern, Robert A.M. (United States); Sustainability and

Sustainable Architecture; Venturi, Robert (United States)

Further Reading

The literature articulating the environmental issues of the twentieth century, as well as
that proposing courses of action, is located within the disciplines of architecture,
planning, environmental engineering, environmental studies, environmental history,
ecology, social ecology, public policy, philosophy, science and technology studies, and
other related disciplines. The texts cited below are a small, representative sample.

Washington, D.C: World Bank, 1997
Carson, Rachel, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, and Cambridge, Massachusetts: Riverside
Press, 1962; London: Hamish Hamilton, 1963
Frampton, Kenneth, “Toward a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture of
Resistance” in edited by Hal Foster, Port Townsend, Washington: Bay Press, 1983;
as London: Pluto Press, 1985
Guy, Simon, and Graham Farmer, “Re-Interpreting Sustainable Architecture: The Place
of Technology,” 54, no. 3 (February 2001)

Heidegger, Martin, translated by William Lovitt, New York and London: Harper
and Row, 1977
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Gland,
Switzerland: International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources,
1980
Jones, David Lloyd, Woodstock, New York: Overlook Press, and London: King,
1998
Lyle, John Tillman, New York and Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley, 1994
Ness, Arne, translated and revised by David Rothenberg, New York and

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989

Olgyay, Victor, and Aladar Olgyay, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University

Press, 1963
Vale, Brenda, and Robert Vale, London: Thames and Hudson, and Boston: Little
Brown, 1991
White, Lynn, Jr., “The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis,” 155, no. 3767 (March
1967)

World Commission on Environment and Development, Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987

ERSKINE, RALPH 1914—

Architect, England

Although English by birth and training, Ralph Erskine has spent the majority of his
working life in Sweden. Born in North London, Erskine was sent to the coeducational
Friends’ School at Saffron Walden near Cambridge (1925-31), where many of his
political and ethical values were formed. In 1932, he entered the Regent Street
Polytechnic, at first to study surveying, and then architecture. Among his fellow students
was Gordon Cullen, the illustrator, whose townscape drawings were to have an important
influence on the representation of the postwar New Towns in Britain. Following
qualification, Erskine sought work with the new modernist firms in London but ended up
working for planner and architect Louis de Soissons, then active in the design of Welwyn
Garden City, the first of Ebeneezer Howard’s garden cities.

Attracted by the humane modernism of the International Exhibition in Stockholm
(1930) and the work of architects such as Erik Gunnar Asplund, Uno Ahrén, and Sigurd
Lewerentz, Erskine left England for the summer in May 1939. He found work with the
firm of Weijke and Odéen in Stockholm. With the outbreak of war in September 1939,
Erskine lost his job but, on being turned down for the Quaker Ambulance Corps, decided
to stay in Sweden. In 1944-45, he studied architecture at the Royal Academy of Art in
Stockholm. During the war, he was able to build very little: a house (known as The Box)
for himself and his wife at Lissma near Djupdalen in 1941-42 made with materials
scavenged on site (reconstructed 1989-93), a modernized log cabin country house for
the inventor Baltzar von Platen at Djupdalen, and a rustic ski lodge and summer holiday
center at Lida Frilufisgard. At war’s end, Erskine opened a practice in Drottningholm on
the outskirts of Stockholm.

Much of Erskine’s practice has been in housing, and he has specialized in involving
the community in the process of design. An early housing project at Gyttorp (1945-55),
for example, used bright colors for the concrete houses to provide a lively effect. Housing
at Gastrike-Hammarby (1948) involved extensive community consultation and careful
attention to the formation of public spaces based on principles he had learned while
working with Louis de Soissons. At Landskrona (1968-71), there was a special effort to
adapt the housing design to the local environment, and at Nya Bruket (1973-78) in
Sandviken, where Erskine was responsible for the shopping street and surrounding


housing, special community centers were included along with satellite parking to ensure a
peaceful residential area.

Architecture for colder climates has also directed Erskine’s practice. At Lulead in
northern Sweden, he built a community center and interior shopping mall (1954-56)
following new American models. In 1959, he presented his ideas on Arctic housing to the
Otterlo meeting of CLAM (Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne) and laid out
the town plan for Svappavaara (1963-64) in Lapland. A long, wall-like building was
designed to shield the community from the Arctic winds, leaving the south side open to
the sun. Erskine later also planned the community at Resolute Bay (1973-77) in the
Nunavut Territories, Canada, a difficult undertaking not only because of the extreme
climate (it is close to magnetic north) but also for the complex mixture of Inuit
inhabitants and North American scientists that reside in the community. Neither
Svappavaara nor Resolute Bay was completed to plan.

Erskine returned to England in 1962 to participate in a project for replanning the
center of Cambridge. In 1968-69, he received the commission for a postgraduate
residential hall at Clare College, Cambridge. His aim was to create “an open ended and
attractive environment which was free from memories of medieval and Renaissance
monumentality or opulence, [and] to ally ourselves with new society builders rather than
the establishment.” The effect of the two-story brick apartments and study halls is
modest, with narrow walkways overhung by wooden balconies.

The best known of Erskine’s works is known as Byker Wall (1969-81) at Newcastle-
upon-Tyne. The traditional home of Newcastle’s shipyard craft workers, the area was
overcrowded and run down by the mid-1960s, a possible target for demolition and
redevelopment. Instead, the District Council Housing Committee decided to improve the
quality of the existing housing and reinforce the character of the community. A long
perimeter-wall apartment block snaking around the crest of the hill and enclosing low-
rise terraced housing was built, and transportation links to the surrounding communities
to foster economic development were planned. Like Erskine’s social housing in Sweden,
cars were excluded from the residential area. Extensive consultation with the local
community led to the preservation of the density of the old neighborhood, and the striped
brick exterior cliff wall (facing the new roadway) evoked a medieval defensive system,
providing visual identity for the development. On the interior of the wall, wood balconies
faced the landscaped interior, creating a village-like intimacy.

The Byker Development was much praised in Sweden, and thereafter Erskine was
hired to help with planning of the new site for Stockholm University at Frescati in 1971.
The library and student center (Allhuset) recalls Erskine’s links to Team X, although the
overall effect of the central hall today, with its exposed structural members and glass
roof, tends to remind visitors, regrettably, of a shopping mall or an airport.

In the 1980s and 1990s, Erskine’s work has taken on new scale. In 1981, the
Drottningholm office staff was cut drastically to allow him to refocus on design. A new
cooperative office was opened in Stockholm, Arken-Erskinearkitekterna AB, with which
Erskine could collaborate but that he did not run. Products of this new freedom include
two office towers (The Ark, London, and Lilla Bommen, Géteborg), the vast bus center
and office complex (Vasaterminalen) in Stockholm, and the Aula Magna at Stockholm
University.


Lilla Bommen, headquarters for Skanska, a development and construction firm, is
located at the entry to the Géta Canal, and the building recalls a giant navigational aid
(buoy or lighthouse) with brown, cream, and red stripes and a periscope-like public
atrium-observation tower. Unlike the typical vertical rental tower, the Ark was conceived
of as being funnel shaped, the edges prowlike. The exterior is a reddish-brown copper
color, and the overall effect is nautical. On the inside are a series of interior terraces
suspended over an open atrium. Above is a glass wall that allows the interior to fill with
natural light, and there is a wood ceiling. The interior, with its white walls and blond
wood, provides its Scandinavian character.

The Aula Magna, near the entrance to the Frescati campus, is attached to Erskine’s
earlier Student House (Allhuset). Holding 1200 people in a main auditorium, the central
gathering space is surrounded by smaller classrooms and open communal study facilities.
The site was located on a south-facing incline with a height differential of ten meters, and
the building flows across the slope in a series of terraces and around a group of a
venerable oak trees. The central auditorium has been designed for effective acoustics
both from the stage to the auditorium and for more democratic exchange among members
of audiences, and the circulation spaces, which double as study alcoves and terraces,
provide an appealing topography to what might have been dead space.

It is sometimes difficult to define the qualities of a building by Erskine.

Working process is generally dominant: local materi-

Byker Redevelopment project,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne (1981),
designed by Ralph Erskine

© Howard Davis/GreatBuildings.com

als and community needs take precedence. The forms recall a variety of Scandinavian
and moder northern European architects: Reima Pietila, Alvar Aalto, and even Hans
Scharoun come to mind. The jutting balconies and unpainted wood surfaces often seem
handmade. The character of his environmental planning reminds one that his Regent
Street Polytechnic classmate was Gordon Cullen: whose drawings often show hot-air
balloons floating above traffic-free urban walkways. There is also, quite frequently, a
high-tech quality to Erskine’s work, sometimes reminiscent of Buckminster Fuller but
also expressed in raw concrete or corrugated sheet steel, exposed structural supports, and
playful adaptations to climatic factors: raised roofs to provide insulation, suspended
balconies for sun without trapping cold air, waterwheels at the ends of gushing
downspouts to provide colorful motion, and sunlight deflectors leading to skylights to
open the dark center of a room to light.

NICHOLAS ADAMS

Biography

Born in Mill Hill, north London, 24 February 1914; settled in Sweden 1939. Studied,
Regent Street Polytechnic, London 1932-37; degree in architecture 1939; attended the
Royal Acad emy of Arts, Stockholm 1944-45. Married Ruth Monica Francis 1939 (died
1988): 3 children. Private practice, Drottningholm, Sweden from 1946; partners with
Aage Rosenvold; branch office, Byker Estate, Newcastle, England 1968. Guest professor,
Eidgenésische Technische Hochschule, Zurich 1964-65; guest professor, McGill
University, Montreal 1967-68. Associate, Royal Institute of British Architects 1937;
member, Royal Town Planning Institute 1938; member, Team X from 1959; member,
Swedish Arkitekts’ Riksférbund 1965; honorary fellow, American Institute of Architects
1966; foreign member, Swedish Royal Academy of Arts 1972; fellow, Royal Society,
London 1984; honorary member, Royal Society of Arts, London 1985. Commander,
Order of the British Empire 1978; Officier, Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, France 1986;
Gold Medal, Royal Institute of British Architects 1987.

Selected Works

The Box, Lissma, near Djupdalen, for the Erskines (reconstructed 1989-93, near
Drottningholm), 1942
Housing, Gyttorp, 1944-55
Housing, Gastrike-Hammarby, 1948
Ski Hotel, Borgafjall, Lapland, 1950
Housing, Avesta, 1953
Shopping center, Lulea, 1956
Villa Nordmark, Sddertilje, 1962
Erskine house, Drottningholm, 1963
Housing, community plan, Svappavaara, 1964
Housing, offices, shops, church, Kiruna, 1966

Clare Hall, Clare College, Cambridge, England, 1969
Housing, Landskrona, 1971
Housing, offices, shops, Barberaren, Sandviken, 1972
Housing, Eaglestone, Milton Keynes, 1973
Housing and township plan, Resolute Bay, Nunavut Territories, Canada, 1977
Housing, Nya Bruket, Sandviken, 1978
Housing, Byker Development Project, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1981
University Library; Student Center, Frescati, Stockholm, 1982
City Terminal and World Trade Center (Vasaterminalen), Stockholm (in collaboration
with Arken-Erskinearkitekterna AB, Tengbom Arkitektkontor), 1989
Juristernas Hus, Stockholm, 1990
Lilla Bommen, Géteborg (in collaboration with White Arkitektur), 1990
Town Center and housing, Tappstrém and Gustavalund, Ekeré, 1991
The Ark, Hammersmith, London (in collaboration with Rock Townsend; Lennart
Bergstrém Architects), 1992
Aula Magna, Frescati, Stockholm, 1998
Erskine’s drawing archive is located at the Swedish Architecture Museum,
Stockholm. Materials related to the Byker Development Project are

located at the Royal Institute for British Architects Library, London.

Selected Publications

“Building in the Arctic,” (May 1960)
“Primer for Subarctic Communities,” (1963)
“Construire dans le Nord,” —- 38sh 134 (1967)
“Indigenous Architecture: Architecture in the Subarctic Region,” 8 (1963)
“Architecture and Town Planning in the North,” 89 (1968)
“Democratic Architecture, the Universal and Useful Art: Projects and Reflections,”
130sh5314 (1982)

Further Reading

Caldenby, Claes, Jéran Lindvall, and Wilfried Wang (editors), Munich: Prestel, 1998
Collymore, Peter, London and New York: Granada, 1982; revised edition, London:
Academy Editions, 1994
Egelius, Mats, London: Architectural Design, 1977
Egelius, Mats, Stockholm: Byggférlaget, 1988; as | Stockholm: Byggforlaget, 1990
Hall, Thomas (editor), Stockholm: Stockholm University Informationsenheten,
1998
Pearman, Hugh, London: Wordsearch, 1993

ESCALATOR

The term “escalator” was developed by the Otis Elevator Company to describe the
moving stairway systems they began producing at the turn of the twentieth century. Otis
Elevator main tained exclusive use of the term until the 1930’s when “escalator” was
declared to be in the public domain.

Elevators provide quick and easy access over long vertical distances and thus were
necessities in the high-rise building type that began to evolve at the end of the nineteenth
century. The escalator provides both vertical and horizontal displacement, usually in an
open environment, making it more appropriate in buildings where only a few floors need
to be connected. The funicular, or inclined elevator, was the predecessor of both the
vertical elevator and the escalator. It evolved into use where the vertical distances were
great and intermediate landings were usually not required such as a ski lifts. Pittsburgh,
PA once boasted fourteen funiculars to move people around the hilly city and they remain
an integral part of the transportation system in Naples, Italy and other parts of Europe.

The predecessor to the modern escalator was the flat stepped “Seeberger” escalator
introduced to the public at the Paris Exposition in 1900. The design necessitated
passengers step off or on the upper landing at an angle to the direction of travel creating a
safety hazard. The “Reno” type, patented about the same time as an “endless conveyor or
elevator,” consisted of a series of slightly inclined flat platforms on a conveyor. A Reno
type escalator installed in the 59th Street Station of the New York subway system at the
turn of the century remained in use until 1955. Both the “Reno” and “Seeberger”
escalators included continuous rotating handrails and were manufactured by the Otis
Elevator Company.

A much earlier moving stairway system, patented in 1859, was the Ames revolving
stair. Its demise was the equilateral treads that forced passengers to awkwardly jump off
and on at right angles to the direction of travel as the tread rotated around the gear.

Other early 20th century improvements to the design of escalators included flat steps
with cleats or combs, and boarding areas parallel to the direction of travel. Developments
during the mid-century include metal treads (instead of wood), glass balustrades, sleeker
lines, and safety enhancements. A late 20th century innovation was the development of
the radial configuration.

Related to escalators are moving walks, both horizontal and inclined designed to speed
the movement of passengers over long distances. Early types, such as the one introduced
at the 1893 Chicago World’s Columbian Exposition, were refined conveyor belts.
Modern moving walkways, incorporating much of the technology used in escalator
design, are familiar sights in airport terminals. Inclined moving walkways are often found
in retail establishments to enable shoppers to move shopping carts from level to level.
Elevators were a key design feature in department stores, museums, concert halls, and
other early 20th century building types built to satiate the need of the burgeoning middle
classes to spend and to be seen. Escalators continue to be used to create opportunities for
enticing shoppers in department stores and shopping malls to view enticing merchandise
displays.

The construction of extensive underground and elevated commuter rail systems in
British, European and American cites contributed to the need for experimentation in the


development of machines to facilitate the transport of large groups of people over
relatively short distances. Escalators enable the management of people in transportation
centers by dispersing surges of users into a uniform flow and quantity. Moscow boasts
the fastest speeds, about 200 feet per minute for escalators traveling into the deepest
subway tunnels. Speed is limited to 100 feet per minute in most other countries for safety
reasons.

During the first half of the 20th century, banking halls were often located on the
second floor in new high-rise buildings. Escalators provided easy access to the banking
hall from the street allowing patrons to observe who was going in and out, whom they
were with, and, what they were wearing. Today lobbies of grand hotels and convention
centers perform the same function; they allow guests to see and be seen during their
leisurely ascents or descents while adorned in their finest garments and jewelry. The
escalators in the lobby of the PSFS (Philadelphia Saving Fund Society) Building
(Philadelphia, PA) originally transported patrons to a banking hall that was recently
converted to the ballroom of a luxury hotel.

Escalators also provide excellent opportunities for viewing monumental architectural
spaces such as those in the East Wing of the National Gallery of Art (Washington, D.C.)
or panoramic views of the natural environment. Architects often use escalators as design
features within large open spaces. They can be arranged in crisscross or parallel
configurations creating bold aesthetic statements.

The process of designing spaces for escalators includes extensive analysis of a
building’s function, the number of occupants, peak periods of use, and knowledge of how
people traverse through space as individuals and in groups. Adequate queuing distances
must be provided at both the top and bottom of landings to allow for large numbers of
people to embark and disembark in an orderly fashion. This is particularly important in
rail facilities when the platform edges may be located near the escalators. Subway
stations feel grossly oversized during much of the day, except at rush hour when they
seem barely adequate to safely contain the passengers in the space.

Escalator configurations (tread width, angle of travel, speed, and design features) are
standardized by code to ensure passerby safety and to make the process of incorporating
escalators into a design less difficult for architects and engineers. Safety requirements
minimize opportunities for innovative aesthetic modifications to escalator systems.
Balustrades, the most prominent feature, may have tempered glass (clear or tinted),
bronze, or, stainless steel safety panels. Panels may be etched with designs to enhance
their appearance or to tie the escalator to the building’s design theme. Handrails may be
colored or lights may be mounted under them to emphasize this feature. Trusses (the
structural support) may be exposed such as at the Zurich Trade Fair in Switzerland or
clad in mirrors, ornamental metals or decorative stone.

KATHRYN PRIGMORE
Elevator

Further Reading

Strakosch, George R. (editor), 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1998

EXHIBITION BUILDING

The development of exhibition buildings is inseparable from international world
expositions. Historian Nikolaus Pevsner demonstrated that the 20th-century exhibition
building has 19th-century origins, with stylistic and programmatic links to the
conservatory and market hall.

Expositions are brief events usually lasting only one season, although they may
consume up to ten years of planning effort. The buildings serve to display the innovative
technological, industrial, economic, scientific, and cultural ideas of the participating
nations. The Bureau International des Expositions (BIE), which administers these events,
selects a timely theme that serves as a catalyst for each event. Themes provide an
informational and organizing principle that guides much of what is designed and
constructed. Themes have been celebratory, such as “The Age of Discovery” for Expo
“92 in Seville, marked by the 500-year anniversary of the sailing of Columbus to the New
World, or more frequently address a global concern, such as “Progress and Harmony for
Mankind” at Expo ’70 in Osaka. Although most buildings must be erected in a short
period of time and are subsequently destroyed, those that come to symbolize the event are
often saved and serve as powerful symbols for the city and issues they commemorate.
The great exposition of London in 1851 had the Crystal Palace by George Paxton and
that of Paris in 1889 the 300-meter-high Eiffel Tower by Gustave Eiffel, and in Chicago
in 1893 the collective works surrounding the grand canal came to be known as “The
White City.’ These landmark exhibitions and their symbolic buildings remain
extraordinarily potent and have influenced most exposition efforts throughout the 20th
century.

The first period of 20th-century exhibition buildings occurred through the late 1920s.
These buildings are generally characterized as being retrospective both stylistically and
historically, in correspondence with the imperialistic tendencies of the dominant Western
nations. Although innovative structural and material applications led to the increasing
scale of construction, these armatures were often surrounded in wooden lath and plaster
known as “staff,” molded into classical elements. The formal results were often awkward,
as the proportion of classical encasements conflicted with large-scale steel structures.
Despite some occasional structural inventions, most exhibition buildings served as
stylistic props, with much attention given to their exterior facades. Highly acclaimed for
resolving these formal problems, the Petite Palais by G.Girault and the Grand Palais by
H.Deglave appeared at the Paris Exposition of 1900, which initiated the theme “A
Century in Retrospect.” In 1914, when the Deutscher Werkbund’s exhibition was held in
Cologne, Walter Gropius’s model factory and Bruno Taut’s Glashaus became icons of
20th-century architecture and modernism. Another popular building in this era was the
Palace of Fine Arts by Bernard Maybeck for the Panama-Pacific International Exposition
of 1915 in San Francisco. Sited on the bank of a lagoon, the overscaled classical Roman
features contributed to a contemplative and melancholy setting that captured the spirit of
the time, as the destruction and waste of World War I was occurring.

An exception to this era’s general tendency occurred in 1929 at the

Barcelona Exposition, where Ludwig Mies van der Rohe was responsible


for the design of the German Pavilion. This was an elegant single-story
building that relied on simplicity, scale, proportion, and quality materials
for its sense of ornament. The design and its furnishings became the most
celebrated pavilion at the exposition and a model for modern architecture.

After

-
'
j
i

er ee

Court of the Universe, by McKim,
Mead and White, from the Panama—
Pacific International Exposition, San
Francisco (1915)

© Museum of the City of New York,
from the Monograph of the Work of
McKim, Mead and White, Vol. IV,
plate 386

the event, it was dismantled but lost. It was reconstructed in 1979 using the original
plans.

The second period of exposition development was initiated by the global economic
depression of the 1930s. Futuristically oriented and intentionally Utopian, these
expositions promoted an optimistic vision of a better life for all. The vision was to be
fueled by scientific innovations, tempered by government guidance, and fulfilled by new
methods of industrial mass production. Throughout this decade, the large-scale steel
structures of exhibition buildings were mainly cubic volumes with flat roofs. The styles
employed were a streamlined art moderne, a futuristic European modernism, a stripped-
down classicism that tended toward the monumental, or a new simple functionalism.
Breaking free from classical iconic constraints, many buildings successfully promoted a

refreshed aesthetic sensibility. Starting with the theme “A Century of Progress” for the
Chicago Exposition of 1933-34, representative examples include the Hall of Sciences by
Paul Cret; the Crystal House by George Fred Keck, which also housed the Dymaxion
automobile (1934) of Buckminster Fuller; and the Hall of Transportation by Hola-bird,
Burnham, and Bennett. Following in this venue was the Paris Exposition of 1937, where
nationalistic pride was baldly displayed at all pavilions, but the most memorable
overscaled and forceful pavilions were for the Soviet Union by Boris Iofan and for
Germany by Albert Speer. At the New York Exposition of 1939, “Building the World of
Tomorrow” came to be symbolized by the sculptural composition of the Trylon and
Perisphere (Wallace Harrison and Andre Foulinhoux), a 213-meter-high triangular spire
and a 60-meter-diameter sphere.

Expositions after World War II maintained the futuristic tendency begun in the 1930s
but sought a greater application of science and technology for peaceful purposes.
Memorable exhibition buildings were the result of greater formal and structural
experimentation. Continuing the exhibition hall’s legacy of vast enclosed space, Pier
Luigi Nervi designed his famous halls for the Turin Expositions of 1948, 1950, and 1961,
notable for their inventive use of concrete. At the Brussels Exposition of 1958, the theme
“Scientific Civilization and Humanism” was symbolized by the Atomium (Andre
Waterkeyn), a geometric form of an iron molecule 102 meters in height and made up of
nine spheres. They were finished in high-gloss aluminum alloy and housed a restaurant,
viewing platform, and displays devoted to the peaceful use of atomic power. The
nationally competitive nature of the expositions continued with the United States Pavilion
by Edward D.Stone, a 104-meter-diameter rotunda with a free-span roof structure of
concentric cables. Juxtaposed with this was the Soviet Pavilion by Abramov, Boretsky
and Poliansky using a symmetrical tensioning system and steel mast supports to carry an
aluminum skylight system that achieved a clear span of 48 meters. What was achieved
was a symbolic expression of technical and scientific prowess that was to be pursued
through the 1970s. Following on these efforts were the Seattle Space Needle of
Exposition’ 62, Frei Otto’s tensile fabric construction for the pavilion of the Federa
Republic of Germany, Buckminster Fuller’s welded spherical space frame for the United
States Pavilion, and the concrete cantilevered high-density housing complex of Moshe
Safdie (known as Habitat), all at Expo ’67 in Montreal.

Since 1970, exhibition buildings have generally continued to be designed along a
similar trajectory in attempting to symbolize technical and scientific progress. Technica.
and scientific endeavors have shifted. The development of expositions has also suffered
with the growing ease of global transportation. The attention of society has moved away
from the heroic expectations and awe that had been imparted by this building type as
similar applications of innovative structural/spatial systems became common for regiona.
sports, transportation, and institutional facilities. By maintaining the exposition formula,
advanced building techniques have only served to heighten the sense of spectacle at
subsequent exhibitions. However, an exception should be noted that might signal the
introduction of a third period of exposition building development. At Expo’ 92 in Seville,
the British Pavilion, by Nicholas Grimshaw and Partners, blended both high- and low-
technical methods to produce a building that offered insightful and globally relevant
approaches to achieving comfortable but dramatic environments without the customary
demands on environmental resources. The appearance of this building underscores the


unique venue that expositions can serve as a platform to explore and present a conscious
range of building options for the future of mankind.
R.SWANSON

Century of Progress Exposition, Chicago (1933); Exhibition Hall, Turin,
Italy; Expo 1958, Brussels; Expo 1967, Montreal; Expo 1992, Seville;
Exposition Universelle, Paris (1900); Fuller, Richard Buckminster (United
States); German Pavilion, Barcelona (1929); Grimshaw, Nicholas, and
Partners (Great Britain); Lisbon World Exposition (1998); Maybeck,
Bernard (United States); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Nervi,
Pier Luigi (Italy); Otto, Frei (Germany); Panama Pacific Exposition, San
Francisco (1915); Safdie, Moshe (Canada, Israel)

Further Reading
(bilingual English-Japanese edition), Tokyo: Architectural Institute of Japan,
1985
Friebe, Wolfgang, Stuttgart, Germany: Kohlhammer, 1983; as translated by

Jenny Vowles and Paul Roper, Leipzig: Edition Leipzig, 1985
Gelernter, David Hillel, New York: Free Press, 1995
Greenhalgh, Paul, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988
Heller, Alfred, Corte Madera, California: World’s Fair, 1999
Mattie, Erik, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998
Pevsner, Nikolaus, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, and London:
Thames and Hudson, 1976
Rydell, Robert W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993

EXHIBITION HALL, TURIN

Designed by Pier Luigi Nervi; completed 1950

The Exhibition Hall of Turin (1949-50) represents a significant achievement in the
building arts of the 20th century. Built in the city of Turin among the vestiges of war-torn
Italy, it was designed, engineered, and built by Italian engineer Pier Luigi Nervi. Widely
known for its innovative adoption of new building materials and construction techniques,
the Exhibition Hall is an eloquent example of the use of reinforced concrete and ferro-
cement. The large, unobstructed spans of the main hall and the exuberant elegance of its
articulated roof structure were made possible by the pioneering efforts and structural
ingenuity of its builder. A building commissioned to showcase the promise of Italy’s
postwar industrial production called for display areas of vast dimensions, and the
undulating concrete canopy of the Turin Exhibition Hall achieved just this.

Its construction epitomized modern architecture’s postwar fascination with structural
engineering. The building’s appearance was derived from its structural logic and process
of assembly. The elasticity and plasticity of poured-in-place concrete, the flexibility of
prefabricated ferro-cement shells, and the ability to calculate and thus control the
building’s static forces were significant factors in determining its final shape. In building
the Exhibition Hall, no boundary separated the architectural search for form from the
engineering imperative to quantify structure.

Programmatically, the Exhibition Hall was a quintessentially modern building. Along
with factories, warehouses, bridges, and power plants, exhibition halls were utilitarian
structures born of the industrial revolution. From turbine engines to plumbing fixtures,
exhibition halls collected and displayed the products of mechanization. A progenitor of
the Turin Hall was the Crystal Palace, designed by Sir Joseph Paxton for London’s Great
Exhibition of 1851; like the later Exhibition Hall, it too was built of prefabricated
components. However, unlike the Turin Hall, the Crystal Palace was built of iron and
glass and achieved interior spans of only 100 feet. Only 100 years later, the use of
reinforced concrete and ferro-cement would result in clear spans of nearly 300 feet.

An invited competition was launched for the construction of a new Exhibition Hall to be
located on the site of the former Palace of Fashion. A general urgency to rebuild existed
throughout Europe, and as the Exhibition Hall was essential in helping to generate future
economic growth for Italy, its building schedule was but a mere eight months. The lack
of building materials, particularly wood for the erection of formwork, further exacerbated
the difficult conditions under which the participants were asked to devise an architectural
solution. The existing palace, destroyed during World War II, was rebuilt by engineer
Biscaretti di Ruffia. The design commission and building tender for the new Exhibition
Hall, however, was entrusted to the engineer ing team of Nervi and Bartoli. The
economical nature of their proposal, with its inexpensive use of materials, managed use
of labor, speed of erection, and avoidance of wooden formwork, made it the favored
solution. The mastery that Nervi and Bartoli had previously achieved in the construction
of large-span structures, such as the Florence Stadium (1929-32) and the airplane
hangers of Orvieto and Orbetello (1937-43), bore confidently on the future success of
their daring proposal.

The complex was built in two stages, the first structure being completed in 1949 and
the second a year later. The initial building, Salone B (Agnelli), was spatially, materially,
and structurally the more extravagant of the two. It comprised two interconnected spaces,
the main hall a rectangular barrel-vaulted enclosure measuring 328 by 262 feet and the
smaller hall an apsidal room, with a half-dome 130 feet in diameter attached to one end
of the main hall. With respect to the cross section, the height at the center of the main hal
rose to over 60 feet, and 25-foot-wide mezzanines were built at the base of the two rows
of supporting piers. The second building, Salon C, measured 213 by 230 feet and was
also roofed with a concrete vault of both precast and poured-in-place elements.


Exhibition Hall, Turin, Italy, interior
longitudianal view, designed by Pier
Luigi Nervi (1949)

© Donald Corner and Jenny
Young/GreatBuildings.com

The project’s success can be attributed to its inventive construction process. To build
during the harsh winter months and reduce the total time required for construction, Nervi
devised a three-part process wherein the first two parts proceeded simultaneously. On
site, the main structural supports of Salone B were built using poured-in-place reinforced
concrete, whereas off-site, the prefabricated sections of the vaulted roof were cast
independently using ferro-cement. Once the main structural piers and floors were in
place, the installation of the roofing members proceeded without the need for additional!
formwork. The individual roof sections, measuring 8 by 13 feet and folded in the profile
of a sinusoidal wave, were aligned and arched into the desired profile of the vault and
bound to each other using poured-in-place concrete, the whole made possible by the use
of movable metal scaffolding. The final phase of construction required bonding the roof
shells to the poured-in-place piers. This was achieved via the on-site pouring of
reinforeed-concrete rib beams. They spanned from pier to pier and were poured within
the upper and lower extremities of the roof section. It was this system of in situ concrete
beams that ensured that the prefabricated roof shells and the structural piers worked
together monolithically.

Still, the most significant characteristic of the Exhibition Hall was its extensive use of
precast ferro-cement. This new material was used here for the first time in the
construction of a large-span building, and the best person disposed to do so was its
inventor, Nervi. In 1943, Nervi registered two patents for ferro-cement and built four
boats using the material. Its ability to be light in weight, thin in section, and difficult to
pierce, yet structurally sound, made it a viable alternative to wood for the construction of


navigational vessels. Ferro-cement represented an entirely new way of conceiving roof
structures and exterior building skins. It inverted the traditional manner in which concrete
and steel were combined. Whereas reinforced concrete involved the insertion of steel
rods within the body of concrete, ferro-cement involved a concrete coating over a body of
steel. Layers of small-diameter steel mesh were intertwined and coated with a mixture of
cement mortar (cement and sand) and folded into a range of contours intrinsic to its
process of construction. The ability to bend the mesh into various shapes rendered
possible the construction of very thin yet structurally sound slabs. The roof section of the
Exhibition Hall was of an undulating corrugated profile whose strength was contained in
only an inch and a half of ferro-cement.

The Exhibition Hall is an architectural and structural marvel of the postwar era. Its
means of construction bear witness to the power of invention in the act of building and to
the hidden potential in uniting the search for form with the measure of materials.

FRANCA TRUBIANO
Concrete; Concrete Shell Structure; Exhibition Building; Nervi, Pier

Luigi (Italy); Pre-cast Concrete

Further Reading

Claudio, Greco, “Pier Luigi Nervi and ‘ferro-cemento’,” 766 (December 1994)
Huxtable, Ada Louise, New York: George Braziller, Inc., 1960
Mateovics, Ernst, “Nervi and the art of ‘correct construction’,’ (June 1996)
Nervi, Pier Luigi, (October 1955)

Nervi, Pier Luigi, Architectural Record (July 1956)

Nervi, Pier Luigi, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1965
Nervi, Pier Luigi, New York: F.W. Dodge Corporation, 1956
New York: Frederick A.Praeger, 1957

“Exhibition Hall,” 95 (July 1951)

EXPO 1958, BRUSSELS

Expo 1958 opened as the first major international exhibition since the end of World War
II. As a world’s fair, the exhibition in Brussels continued the century-old tradition of
economic and technological competition among participating nations. Although
technology and commerce were important aspects of the fair, its organizers cast the event
as a cultural exchange, a celebration of the art and culture of the atomic age. To this end,
the various pavilions (representing 43 nations and a variety of corporations) celebrated
the broad spectrum of contemporary architecture, from the glass-and-steel modernism of
Vjenceslaw Richter’s Yugoslavian Pavilion to the hyperbolic paraboloid of Guilliame
Gillet’s French Pavilion. Amid the spectacular variety of architecture present at the fair
loomed the specter of the Cold War (the American press referred to the event as a cultural

Cold War). The United States and the Soviet Union faced off, the Soviets displaying their
technological prowess with a model of the satellite and the Americans emphasizing a
rhetoric of democracy, prosperity, and freedom. Against this backdrop, the fair’s
towering theme building, the Atomium (modeled on a steel molecule), called attention to
the benefits of atomic energy in an era when nuclear war seemed ever more likely.

No single architectural style governed the fair, and this allowed each participant to
explore a variety of forms, materials, and technologies. A number of buildings celebrated
structure and engineering, drawing on recent developments in precast concrete, tensile
structures, and modern materials, such as plastic. Overall, the fair was characterized by
the swooping, projecting, and dynamic geometric forms so popular in the structura.
exhibitionism of the 1950s. Amid the profusion of parabolas, cantilevers, concrete, and
glass, two pavilions stood out: the American Pavilion, for its imperialistic and political
overtones, and the Philips Pavilion, for its innovative combination of space, light, and
sound.

The American Pavilion epitomized the economic and cultural competition that
pervaded the fair. Located on a choice location next to the rectangular glass-and-stee:
Soviet Pavilion (dubbed “the refrigerator” by American commentators), Edward Durel.
Stone’s circular pavilion housed a series of exhibits intended to showcase the cultural and
technological achievements of the United States. The U.S. government viewed the fair as
a chance to elevate American prestige in Europe, to counter Soviet propaganda, and to
divert attention away from its crushing defeat in the space race (the Soviets had been the
first to successfully launch an earth-orbiting satellite, in 1957). To this end, the
Department of State and the American Institute of Architects chose Edward Durell Stone,
the architect of the United States Embassy (1954-58) in New Delhi, as the architect for
the pavilion. Stone designed a circular building with no internal supports and an elaborate
roof structure comprised of tension cables and concrete compression rings (resembling a
bicycle wheel laid on its side) supporting translucent plastic panels. Stone wrapped the
exterior of the building with a slender colonnade and a plastic grillwork, combining
classical forms and motifs with strikingly modern materials (a recurring theme in Stone’s
architecture).

The pavilion designed for the Philips Corporation remains one of the most
interesting of the exhibition. Philips Electronics (a major international
producer of items ranging from lightbulbs to loudspeakers and tape
recorders) decided to commission a unique multimedia work of art for the
exhibition instead of the typical trade show display of products. Philips
commissioned Le Corbusier to design a pavilion to house a unique
multimedia exhibit that combined a musical composition by the modern
composer Edgard Varése titled with a collage and film by Philippe
Agostini. Le Corbusier created a striking design for the pavilion,
combining a hyperbolic paraboloid and a conic section. The building
consisted of a thin shell of concrete sprayed on a tensile structure of steel
cables, surrounding an open plan on the interior (the expressive nature of
Le Corbusier’s design recalls his Chapel [1955] at Ronchamp). Varése’s


eight-minute composition filled the unique acoustics of the structure, and
the projected imagery covered the abstract geometries of

The Atomium (Molecule Building)
from the World Exposition in Brussels
(1958) was composed of nine
aluminum spheres 55 feet in diameter
connected by aluminum tubes. Inside
the spheres are a restaurant (top
sphere), bar, atomic exhibit, and other
attractions. The spheres are linked by
elevators and escalators running inside
the tubes.

© Bettmann/CORBIS

the interior of the building. This overwhelming sensory and intellectual experience left
many visitors confused; nonetheless, Varése’s work stands as a significant example of
spatial composition in 20th-century music.

Although the fair and its architecture received little scholarly attention following its
close, there was a resurgence of interest in the fair in the 1990s. As part of the ongoing

reappraisal of modernism in architecture, the fair epitomizes the variety of modernist
idioms available to architects and clients in the late 1950s. In addition to Le Corbusier’s
Philips Pavilion, there has been a rediscovery of Norwegian architect Sverre Fehn’s own
version of modernism (Fehn’s Norwegian Pavilion combined pinewood, plastic, and
bush-hammered concrete in a more humanizing and organic version of Miesian
modernism). Other scholars have focused on the role of the fair in the complex
relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union during the height of the Cold
War.

Regardless of the political overtones of the Brussels World Exhibition, the public saw
the fair as a stunning success, both for its optimistic view of technology and for the sheer
exuberance of much of the fair’s modern architecture. At a time when the public was
tiring of modernism (particularly the corporate idiom of rectilinear glass-and-stee:
architecture), the celebration of structure and dynamic architectural forms seen at the
Brussels World Exhibition reinvigorated interest in the possibilities of modern
architecture. Although experiments into the expressive and sculptural possibilities of
concrete in architecture had been under way for nearly a decade (particularly in the work
of Matthew Nowicki, Felix Candela, and Pier Luigi Nervi), the fair called attention to and
promoted some of the more innovative possibilities of modern architecture, setting the
stage for the overwhelming public acceptance of works from Jorn Utzon’s Sydney Opera
House (1973) to Eero Saarinen’s TWA Terminal (1962) at John F.Kennedy Airport in
New York.

MATTHEW S.ROBINSON
Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut, Ronchamp, France; Corbusier, Le
(Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France); Fehn, Sverre (Norway); Saarinen,
Eero (Finland); Stone, Edward Durell (United States); Sydney Opera
House; TWA Airport Terminal, New York; Utzon, Jorn (Denmark)

Further Reading

Although there are no comprehensive works dealing solely with the Brussels World
Exhibition, several recent works address the broader cultural and architectural
significance of world’s fairs. Both Robert Haddow and Robert Rydell have explored the
political circumstances behind the United States presence at the Brussels fair, placing the
U.S. pavilion in the broader cultural and political context of the Cold War. Erik Mattie’s
provides an overview of the architecture of most of the major exhibitions since 1851.
Marc Treib’s creative and exhaustive treatment of Le Corbusier’s Philips Pavilion
provides insight into the more innovative aspects of the Brussels fair’s architecture.
Finally, the critic Howard Taubman presents an interesting contemporary viewpoint of
the fair in the context of cultural competition.

“Architecture at Brussels: Festival of Structure,” 123 (June 1958)

Haddow, Robert H., Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997
Mattie, Erik, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998
Rydell, Robert W., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993

“Sverre Fehn, Norwegian Pavilion, World Exhibition Brussels, Belgium, 1956-1958,”
340 (January 1999)

Taubman, Howard, “Cold War on the Cultural Front,” (13 April 1958)
Treib, Marc, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1996

EXPO 1967, MONTREAL

Planned and constructed in just four years, the 1967 Universal and International
Exhibition (Expo ’67), held in Montreal, Canada, was an extraordinary achievement for
the quality of its urban planning, integrated transportation systems, and space frame
architecture.

After visiting the 1958 World’s Fair in Brussels, Canadian senator Mark Drouin,
together with Montreal mayor Sarto Fournier, petitioned the federal government to apply
for a world exhibition to celebrate Canada’s forthcoming centennial in 1967. The request,
submitted to the Bureau International des Expositions (BIE) in Paris, fell short, however,
as the 1967 exposition was awarded instead to the Soviet Union to celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the revolution. When the Soviet Union bowed out on | April 1962 because
of the exposition’s tremendous estimated cost, Canada immediately reapplied. In
November 1962, the BIE granted Canada permission to stage a “first category”
exhibition, which stipulated in part international participation, a contemporary theme, and
minimal commercial content.

The Canadian Corporation for the 1967 World Exhibition (CC WE) was to manage the
fair in Montreal. Its theme, “Man and His World,” was inspired by French author and
aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s book . Four sub-themes were additionally chosen—
“Man the Explorer,” “Man the Creator,” “Man the Producer,” and “Man in the
Community”—with separate pavilions devoted to each.

In January 1963, architects Bedard, Charbonneau, and Langlois agreed upon a site,
using the city waterfront and a man-made island offshore in the St. Lawrence River
connected to existing Ile Sainte-Héléne, an early 19th-century military installation turned
into a park. Preparation of the site began in August 1963, and construction was completed
ten months later. Fifteen million tons of landfill, dredged from the river and excavated
from Montreal’s accelerated subway construction in preparation for Expo, was used to
double the size of Ile Sainte-Héléne (with the original island left as a public park) and to
create the new fle Notre-Dame. Under the management of Commissioner General Pierre
Dupuy, Colonel Edward Churchill was placed in charge of the Installations Department.
In the project’s early stages, Van Ginkel & Associates, a local urban-planning office, was
charged with developing the site design, but for the final site plan the BIE commissioned
Montreal architects André Blouin, Fred Lebensold, and Guy Desbarats. In December
1963, the master plan for Expo’ 67 was submitted to the Canadian Parliament for
approval, and the completed site was turned over to the CCWE the following July for the
infrastructure and pavilions.

The principal architects and planners of Expo’ 67 included Edouard Fiset as chief
architect, Adele Naudé (from Harvard) as site plan designer, and architect-urbanist
Steven Staples (from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) as head of the planning
team. The site design borrowed from various influences, including the 1964-65 New

York World’s Fair, modernist urban-planning and North American suburban shopping
center layouts, and the ideas of MIT planning professor Kevin Lynch.

Expo’s 285-hectare site was divided into four main activity poles: (1) the
entrance and administration buildings, which were constructed as
permanent structures, at Cité-du-Havre in Pointe-Saint-Charles and on
Mackay Pier in the port; (2) the extended southwestern end of Ile Sainte-
Héléne with pavilions, Place-des-Nations public square, and connected to
the Cité-du-Havre by the new Concordia Bridge (Beaulieu, Trudeau &
Associates, engineers; Claude Beaulieu, consulting architect); (3) the fle
Notre-Dame, where most of the pavilions were located; and (4) the La
Ronde amusement area on the northern end of Ile Sainte-Héléne. Because
the St. Lawrence River surrounded the site, water was a major motif
expressed by the lagoons and canals on Ile Notre Dame, two small lakes
on Ile Sainte-Héléne, and the placement of the most preferred pavilion
sites on the water’s edge.


USS. Pavilion at Expo 1967, by
Buckminster Fuller and Shoji Sadao, at
Montreal, Canada (1967)

© Lawrence
A.Martin/GreatBuildings.com

To unify the site, the largest national pavilions were grouped as poles of attraction with
theme pavilions and train stops nearby. These anchor poles were placed at the extreme
ends and around the periphery of the activity areas to create striking perspectives and
vistas and a flow of people by the smaller pavilions, shops, sculptures and fountains,
entertainment stages, and kiosks in between. Scenic perspectives were created by specific
alignments and orientations, and, except for the more important pavilions, the size of the
architecture was restricted to a human scale.

Transportation to and around the Expo site was remarkably well integrated, and aimed
to make the fair easily navigable. From large parking lots at Cité du Havre and at
Longueuil on the river’s south shore, the primary conveyor was the Expo Express rapid-
speed train operating on elevated tracks. The main secondary system was a slower,
elevated monorail train bought from the 1964 national exposition at Lausanne,
Switzerland. Other means of moving about the site included boats and ferries in the
canals and lagoons, cable cars over La Ronde, and trailer trains driving on roads
separated from the pedestrian paths. Motor vehicles were banned from the site except for
service vehicles on periphery routes. Apart from the Expo Express train, the island site
could be accessed from the city by subway to Ile Ste-Héléne, hovercraft, and ferry or
from one of several bridges.

Fifty-three private pavilions and 60 others representing 120 countries were erected for
Expo’ 67. For the most part, the buildings were experimental, contemporary in design,
and expressively modernist. One of many guidelines imposed for the pavilions stipulated
a light and temporary rather than a massive and permanent appearance. As a result, the
most significant structural forms were built of prefabricated, modular elements assembled
in striking sculptural forms, such as the covering of the West German Pavilion, made of a
suspended cable mesh system designed by architect Frei Otto. However, the most
significant system by far was space frame construction utilizing aluminum tube
components, most impressively in Buckminster Fuller’s geodesic dome for the United
States Pavilion and the flexible assembly of Walter Eykelenboom’s Netherlands Pavilion.

Experiments in prefabricated, low-cost housing were also of architectural note at
Expo’ 67, particularly the Cuban Pavilion (Baroni, Garatti, Da Costa, architects) and
Habitat’ 67 (Moshe Safdie, architect, with David, Barott, Boulva, associated architects).
Whereas the former featured a bolted steel frame and brightly painted aluminum panel
walls, the latter was constructed of factory-produced concrete units assembled as a large
prototype community housing project.

The creation of the Expo’ 67 site and its superb urban design ultimately have had a
longer-lasting impact than any of the fair’s architecture, as only space frame systems
have found substantial applications in today’s buildings. At present, half a dozen of the
original pavilions remain, including the French and Quebec Pavilions, which have been
modified and merged to form the Montreal Casino, and the United States Pavilion,


recycled into an environmental information center. The islands are now known as Jean
Drapeau Park, Montreal’s largest green space.
MICHELE PICARD
Exhibition Building; Fuller, Richard Buckminster (United States); Otto,

Frei (Germany); Safdie, Moshe (Canada, Israel)

Further Reading

Dupuy, Pierre, Ottawa, Ontario: Les Editions de la Presse, 1972
(bilingual English-French edition), Toronto, Ontario: Maclean-Hunter, 1967
Fiset, Edouard, “Expo 67: Introduction of an Urban Concept in the Planning of the
Exposition,” 42, no. 5 (1965)
Fulford, Robert, Toronto, Ontario: McClelland and Stewart, 1968
— (bilingual English-French edition), Montreal: Canadian Centre for
Architecture, 1993
(bilingual English-French edition), Montreal: Canadian Corporation for the 1967
World Exhibition, 1963
Rowan, Jan, editor, “‘Editorial’ and “Commentary and Analysis’: The Architect’s Expo,”
48, no. 6 (1967)
Staples, Steven, “Planning for Success: Reflections on Expo 67,” 12, no. 4 (1992)

EXPO 1992, SEVILLE

The international exposition at Seville, Spain in 1992 attracted over 36 million visitors,
making it one the most successful exhibitions of its kind in the world. At least eight
billion dollars was spent on 111 pavilions, buildings and landscape architecture,
infrastructure and other services. There were 108 participating countries, 17 independent
communities, 23 international organizations and 7 companies with their own buildings,
all included on a list that went far beyond the expected number of participants. The
purpose of Expo 1992 was to celebrate the 500-year anniversary of the arrival of
Christopher Columbus to America. The project was managed by two general
commissioners, Manuél Olivencia Ruiz and Emilio Casinello Auban. Two proposals for
master plans were accepted—one by Emilio Ambasz, the other by the firm Fernandez
Ordofiez, Junquera and Pérez Pita—and the latter was chosen.

An entirely new infrastructure was created for the Spanish exposition, including
highways, bridges, a new opera house (designed by L.Marin, A del Pozo and E Yanez),
an international airport (by R.Moneo), a bus station (J.Cuenca), and a railway station
(A.Cruz, A.Ortiz), for the first high speed train that runs from the capital city of Madrid
to Seville in two hours and thirty minutes. Expo 1992 was officially inaugurated by H.M.
Juan Carlos I, king of Spain, on April 20, 1992.

The site was divided into three well defined sections: the international participants
were located at the north in straddle theme avenues, Spain and the provincial pavilions
were placed around an artificial lake along the east side of the complex, and
environmental theme pavilions, gardens and the introductory halls were built near the
monastery of — south and southeast of Island.

Sustainable architecture included water mist sprays as cooling devices and natural and
artificial shades everywhere to protect visitors from the extreme summer temperatures.
An open theater, (designed by J.M.de la Prada), was built for concerts, pageants, and
additional cooling shade.

The eight bridges that connect the Old City with Island were internationally
acclaimed and deserve a particular notice. Designed by Santiago Calatrava and
resembling a gigantic harp, the 142-meter Bridge was suspended by cables with
extraordinary sophistication. The Bridge (by Arenas and Pantaleén) is an equally
extraordinary structure.

The pavilions could be divided in different types including vernacular
buildings, high-tech buildings, historic or folkloric structures, and massive
structures. Vernacular buildings were in large part constructed of wood,
such as the Hungarian Pavilion (by I.Makovecz) constructed of a massive
oak tree with its roots visible under a glass floor, representing the wisdom
of past ages. The Japanese Pavilion, designed by Tadao Ando, was an
allegory to traditional wood-crafting techniques, with a structure built with
an intricate system of joinery avoiding the use of nails. The Finnish
Pavilion, designed by Sanaksenaho, Rouniainen, Jaaskelainen, Tirkkonnen
and Kaakko, was an unusual example of simplicity and cultural
representation. It comprised two parallel blocks, the first known as the
keel, representing the tradition of boat making. The other built with steel
as characteristic of the industrial culture as counterpart, represented the
machine.

The narrow gap between the two structures was named the “hell throat,” and referenced
the rugged Finnish landscape.

Among the high-tech buildings, those from the United Kingdom stood out, in
particular, the British Pavilion, designed by Nicholas Grimshaw. This environmentally
sensitive structure comprised a glass box with solar panels roof slabs, and curtains of mist
and water falling over a glass wall to cool the building and generate electricity at the
same time. The German Pavilion (by H.Muhlberger and G.Lippsmeier), inspired by
dirigibles and flying machines, included an elliptical roof suspended by cables from an
inclined post that supported it, and a building constructed with polycarbonate shields.

Design competition for U.S. Pavilion
(1989), Expo 1992 by Venturi Rauch
amd Scott Brown

© Venturi, Scott Brown and
Associates

Among the historic and folkloric representation included pavilions from Morocco,
India, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Thailand, Mauritania, Philippines and Indonesia. The
Moroccan Pavilion, in particular, blended fountains, tiles and Moorish ornamentation.

JAVIER GOMEZ ALVAREZ-TOSTADO
Calatrava, Santiago (Spain); Exhibition Building

Further Reading

Rispa, Raul, Cesar Alonso de los Rios, and Maria José Aguzaga, (editors). (exhib.
cat.), Italy: Electa 1992.
Fernandez Galiano, Luis, “Sevilla Silicio y Silicona” 6. Mexico (Summer 1992)
Russell J.S., Cohn D., “Spain’s Year: Barcelona and Seville,” U.S. 1992.

EXPOSITION UNIVERSELLE, PARIS
(1900)

The Paris Exposition Universelle of 1900 was meant by its sponsors to be both a
retrospective summation of the material progress of the 19th century and a hopeful
harbinger for the 20th. The 1900 event was the fifth Paris Exposition of the 19th century.
Paris had hosted ever-larger events every 11 years since 1856, and expectations ran high

for the greatest exposition ever in 1900. The 1889 Exposition Universelle, which had
celebrated the centennial of the French Revolution, was France’s first truly international
fair and had been an unqualified success, both intellectually and economically, despite a
shaky start. The 1900 Fair also had its share of initial uncertainties. The Dreyfus Affair
threatened the Exposition with an international boycott, and the bitter of the winter of
1889-1900 and heavy spring rains further complicated the project, so although the
Exposition officially opened with great ceremony on 14 April, paying customers were not
admitted to the grounds for several more weeks.
The Exposition was laid out on several large precincts within Paris and in the Bois de
Vincennes east of the city (the latter being the site of the Games of the Second
Olympiad). Despite the fact that the Commissioner General of the Exposition, Alfred
Picard, had graduated from the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées in the 1860, the 1900
Exposition did not have the large, showstopping engineering feats of 1889; French
engineers concentrated their efforts in the construction of the Metro, notable for architect
Hector Guimard’s Art Nouveau stations and Victor Laloux’s Gare d’Orsay, which carried
fair visitors from the provinces to the Exposition gates. The buildings and landscape
features of the Exposition were awarded to architects and engineers within the closed
circle of the French academies in the hope that the aesthetic presentation of the Fair
would be in uniform good taste. The result was less than hoped for. Although there was
no single spectacular building, and there were several important permanent constructions
that were very well received, the grounds were more noteworthy for the wide assortment
of temporary constructions that were aesthetically adventurous and even controversial.
The permanent monuments for the capital city were the Pont Alexandre III, which
leapt across the Seine in one graceful arch, and the Grand and Petit Palais. The bridge
continued the line of the newly established Esplanade des Invalides across the river past
the two Palais to the Champs Elysées to the north. The Grand Palais, home to the
contemporary art exhibitions (whose content was completely controlled by the Academie
des BeauxArts), was designed by the team of Henri Deglane, Albert Louvet, and
A.E.T.Thomas. The building hid behind Deglane’s imposing Neoclassical central
pavilion and sweeping colonnades an enormous steel-and-glass atrium, which spanned
the length of the building. Charles Girault’s Petit Palais, perhaps the architectural success
of the Exposition, housed a retrospective fine art exhibit. Girault skillfully handled the
difficult transitions at the odd corners necessitated by the building’s trapezoidal plan and
yet reveled in the free-Baroque classicism then fashionable among the faculty at the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts. The building’s primary motif, a high arched entry that cut into a
low steel dome, was adopted by French-trained architects around the globe in the years
after the Exposition.
The temporary structures of the Exposition did not feature the restraint found in those
structures that were intended to be permanent. Although some of them were interesting in
their adoption of past architectures to modern purposes, others were simply novel. The
Palace of Electricity, the home of the Exposition’s dynamos and generators, terminated
the Champs-de-Mars to the south and presented the viewer with a riot of baroque
architectural elements, none of which were particularly related to one another. The whole
was crowned by an allegorical extravaganza that set Electra in ecstasy atop a chariot,
behind which rose a spiky steel-and-glass sunburst that if scaled down would be at home
in any early-1960s rumpus room. The whole Palace, however, was nothing but a


backdrop to the real feature of the site, the Chateau d’Eau, an immense waterfall 100 feet
wide that gushed water over its terraces at the rate of 1.5 million gallons an hour. The
whole was lit at night with colored light, the fountains bubbling and water jets dancing in
a spectacle that was said to rival the fountains at Versailles.

The most controversial structure at the Exposition was probably René Binet’s Porte de
Concorde. This strange, oversized gateway sheltered the ticket booths and check stations
under a steel dome, which was supported by three yawning arches encrusted with floral
ornament. Two soaring minarets flanked the structure to further punctuate the work. The
whole was studded with electric lights, so that the building shimmered with colored light
at night. Although the architecture was not lauded for its novelty, true vitriol was
reserved for crowning sculptural ornament, a 20-foot high statue of “The City of Paris,”
represented by a woman in revealing evening dress. Many Parisians were scandalized by
the statue’s lifelike flesh tones and immodest vestments and claimed that the statue more
truly represented the city’s prostitutes than the genteel women of Paris. Whatever the
claims of her sartorial miscalculation, “La Parisienne” was a functional success—her
ample gates welcomed as many as 60,000 guests an hour on the high féte days.

The 1900 Fair is perhaps most important architecturally for its national pavilions and
cultural presentations. Nations of the first rank were given large lots on the Quai des
Nations, where an impressive, if riotous, melange of national styles were presented.
Twenty-three nations constructed their own edifices, and all but one of these were
evocations of particular nation’s architecture. Britain, for example, constructed a Tudor-
style house, whereas Germany built a very large baroque city hall, and Italy fused the
Duomo at Siena with St. Mark’s at Venice to create a rather unnatural hybrid palazzo.
The one pavilion that did not denote its nation’s architectural traditions was that of the
United States, where American architects designed a Beaux-Arts pavilion. Boasting a
triumphal arch entry-porch and a high steel-andcopper-clad dome, the building resembled
a diluted version of Richard Morris Hunt’s Administration Building at the World’s
Columbian Exposition of 1893. Of all the national pavilions, perhaps that with the most
lasting importance to the history of architecture was Gesellius, Lindgren and Saarinen’s
Finnish Pavilion. This work, located in the second rank of national pavilions behind the
Quai des Nations, juxtaposed the fortresslike character of its exterior stone walls and high
tower with the softer, more introspective feel of its great hall, which was trimmed and
roofed in native Finnish woods and ornamented with representations of the country’s
native flowers and woodland creatures. A landmark in the National Romantic style, the
pavilion cemented Eliel Saarinen’s international reputation as an architect capable of
powerful yet sensitive work.

The colonial exhibitions at the grounds of the Palais du Trocadero were less culturally
sensitive. Building on the ethnographic displays of the 1889 Exposition, the European
powers were encouraged to celebrate their colonial holdings with simulations of these
exotic locales. Natives of each land were brought to Paris to demonstrate folkways and
perform religious and dance ceremonies for the public within well-crafted evocations of
their homes in what can only be described as a human zoo. Across the river, the grounds
in and around the Champs de Mars again hosted scientific and industrial exhibits. The
Palais des Machines was again pressed into service for the Exhibition, but it was hardly
noticed among the sea of similar iron-and-glass structures in the precinct. The decorative
arts and light manufactures were displayed in pavilions along the Esplanade des


Invalides. This implied a clear separation from the fine arts, located across the Pont
Alexandre III, and the crafts. As a result, the works of masters such as Emile Gallé, Louis
Comfort Tiffany, and René Lalique were not viewed either in the Grand Palais or in the
national pavilions, but in their own small storefronts. In fact, despite the fact that the Fair
would later be remembered as the event that popularized the Art Nouveau, only the
Austrians and Germans exhibited the new forms in their national presentations.

The twin objectives of the Exposition—the reflection on the past and the
foreshadowing of the future—were fulfilled admirably. The environmental design and art
designed and collected for the event summed up decades of 19th-century academic
eclecticism as practiced in official French art institutions. At the same time, the industrial
and scientific exhibits showcased the industrial design, electrical technology, and military
equipment that would lead to much of the material culture and political crises of the new
twentieth century. Like any world’s fair, the Universal Exposition of 1900 asked its
participants to leave behind the social, economic, and political strife of the outside world
once they crossed into the Exposition grounds. For a few days the visitor was asked to
believe that the ideals of universal brotherhood and economic prosperity were not only
possible, but also imminent. In hindsight, of course, the Exposition proved to be a brief
respite from the that would lead Europe into the chaos of the First World War. Within a
few years, the political and social optimism espoused by the Exposition’s promoters soon
proved as illusory as the Potemkin village that was the fairgrounds itself.

JEFFREY THOMAS TILMAN
Exhibition Building; Metro Station, Paris; Paris, France; Saarinen, Eliel

(Finland)

Further Reading

Drexler, Arthur (editor), New York: Museum of Modern Art, and London: Seeker
and Warburg, 1977
Evenson, Norma, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1979
Luckhurst, Kenneth W., = London and New York: Studio, 1951
Mandell, Richard D., Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1967
St. Louis, Missouri: Thompson, 1900
Tuchman, Barbara Wertheim, New York: Macmillan, and London: Hamilton,
1966

EXPRESSIONISM

The postimpressionist revolution in late 19th-century painting eventually brought the
opposite of figurative representation, namely, Expressionism. If representation was no
longer the main goal of art, the expression of one’s inner spiritual self offered itself as an
alternative. In the first decade of the 20th century, this direction was taken primarily by

German artists, most successfully by the two movements Der Blaue Reiter and Die
Briicke. Painters such as Wassily Kandinsky and Ernst Ludwig Kirchner used art to
express the soul and their emotional reactions to the modern era. Their paintings
introduced a cryptic, abbreviated style to art. The origin of a design in the creator’s self
and a drawing technique that was not concerned with exact figural representation were
among the main impulses for Expressionist architecture.

Centered primarily in Germany and the Netherlands, Expressionist architects, just like
their mainstream International Style colleagues, tried above all to cope with the industrial
age. However, like their namesakes in painting, they attempted to express this age instead
of representing it. Apart from this artistic goal, Expressionist architecture also dealt with
communal concepts. Immediately after World War I, the massive physical and human
destruction that had been caused by the first large-scale mechanical warfare engendered
an anti-industrial feeling. Industry had excelled in manufacturing death machines that
resulted in utter destruction. Such a common enemy brought forth thoughts about
fraternization, community, and democracy. Especially in Germany, the postwar reality
was difficult to bear. The shock of having lost the war brought with it the feeling that an
era had passed and that it was time to orchestrate the rebirth of communal life and the
arts. With its propagation of exactly such goals, Expressionism offered a feasible way to
cope with the problems of the early 1920s in Europe. Expressionism rejected the machine
age as the foundation of artistic creation. In architecture, this came out as the opposition
to design as conditioned only by utility, materials, construction, and economics. Instead,
Expressionism advocated that political and artistic revolution were the same by
transposing the social uprising into artistic activity.

Apart from the origin in painting, immediate stylistic sources of Expressionism in

architecture are found in Art Nouveau and other late 19th-century attempts at renewal,
especially in the work of Hendrik Petrus Berlage, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Otto Wagner.
Art Nouveau (Jugendstil) was particularly favored because it had rejected industria
construction methods and displayed a rather romantic longing in its naturalistic
decorative structures. However, Expressionist architects had quite an open attitude
toward the past. The styles in which all the arts had combined to produce decorated forms
were preferred sources for inspiration. From Egypt came the concepts of cave and tower.
Gothic architecture provided examples for the social and communal purposes of
architecture and showed the triumph of expression over function. Far Eastern architecture
was an important source because it combined architectural and sculptural forms and
because of the mystical doctrines that informed this architecture.
The particular mind-set of Expressionist architects was also influenced by literary and
philosophical sources, found primarily in Nietzsche and Kierkegaard. From Nietzsche
came the admonition to let primitive instincts, not conscious self-control, determine
artistic creations, whereas Kierkegaard emphasized the psychological background for this
style in the spiritual searching and feeling of despair that were produced through the
material instability.

The most significant heritage of Expressionism is that it attempted to solve the
problems of the world through mainly symbolic architecture. Architects felt that they had
to act on behalf of society and believed that they had to force people to realize their
happiness through building. In those years, the spiritual realm was very far removed from
reality. Expressionist architecture had a strong Utopian urge. It was the search for a new


reality, a new sense of life, and a new ethics of humanity. Many of the projects are indeed
on a cosmic scale. This stemmed primarily from architects aiming to create their designs
directly from their own visions. They let their hands draw the designs automatically and
tried to exclude the mind from participating in the sketching. Their designs came out of
an uncontrollable inner necessity and an inner spiritual life. The architects felt themselves
to be the instruments of an absolute, metaphysical will and saw their task as transforming
this spirit into reality. They wanted to achieve the direct transformation of consciousness
into pure activity and did not pay much consideration to the objects that resulted from
this. Theirs was an architecture that appealed to the intellect through feeling. With such
practices, Expressionist architects found their modernity independently, unlike the
International Style, which found its modernity through representation. Like the
International Style, Expressionism avoided the literal imitation of traditional styles, but it
also focused on expressing ideas. The Expressionist conception of the building was that
of a total work of art that would present an aesthetic unity and thus become communal
art. In this sense, architecture was spiritual.

In terms of form, Expressionist architects had a preference for cavelike interiors and
towerlike exteriors. Inside their buildings, one felt enveloped not by walls and ceiling but
by an encompassing membrane. Interiors felt physically oppressing on the inhabitant,
who had to use sight, touch, and other synesthetic senses to understand his or her
whereabouts. The theme of the cave was articulated in the exterior through a tectonic
treatment of the building surfaces. The tower shape was articulated mostly by fashioning
buildings as crowns, be they in the city or on the top of mountains.

In Germany, Paul Scheerbart instigated the preference for glass and crystals among
Expressionist architects. Scheerbart can best be described as one of the fathers of science
fiction in Germany. Apart from providing technical information in his book (1914),
Scheerbart also promoted glass building for its generation of a new morality. Glass stood
for brighter awareness, clearer determination, and utter gentleness. It represented the
search for light and higher truth—the clarification of the soul—and can generally serve as
a social catalyst. Glass buildings can function as shelter as well as extend garden
architecture. This transparent material forces the users to continually relate to their
environment, both the natural and the cosmic one. Glass buildings resemble states of
emotion and suggest infinite space. In its mineral form, as crystal, glass became a symbol
for the new life. Thus, glass and crystal forms presented the milieu that would give birth
to the new culture.

Many Expressionist architects gave glass a special role in their designs. Bruno Taut,
the organizer and indefatigable theoretician of Expressionism, was particularly taken with
Scheerbart’s ideas. He accepted the purifying potential of glass and crystal in his designs.
These were especially notable in the Glass Pavilion he designed in 1914 for the glass
industry at the Cologne Werkbund exhibition. There, Taut added a cosmological
component. Glass was used as the material that enabled the reconciliation of mind and
matter. The Glass Pavilion created primarily an experience for the user in the form of a
purification ritual. It was intended to introduce a lighter building method and high-light
the effects of glass to architecture. It is assembled from a centralized building with an
addition at the back. The pavilion consists of a geodesic dome on a concrete base. Prism
glass in reinforced-concrete frames was used for both the walls and the stair treads
leading up to the glass hall. This is covered by a crystal-shaped dome assembled from


reinforced-concrete ribs and colored-glass panels resting on prism glass. Visitors took a
predetermined path that ultimately led them to the cascade room on the lower level.
Water flowed down glass steps and terminated in a recess in which pictures from a
kaleidoscope were projected. The procession through this pavilion was characterized by
seductive anticipation and an increasingly intense experience of space. In Taut’s later
(1919), glass was used on an increased scale by designing glass pavilions on
mountaintops.

As such endeavors suggest, Expressionism was a romantic movement. It can rightfully
be criticized for not having been able to resist the seduction from formal aspects of
architecture at the expense of all other concerns. Many Expressionist designs look like
they are ready to depart. This notion of mobile architecture was aimed to symbolize
metamorphosis and transcendence. Taut’s early apartment buildings of the 1910s
xemplify these goals. In these large structures, he attempted to engender a communal
mpression through color and facade articulation. Similarly, Erich Mendelsohn’s early
etches express a dynamic feeling. These designs show forms that are derived from
tructure and the expression of the purpose of the building. They are rather abstract
enderings of these intentions. The essence of the projects is artistic, not architectural, as
hey are not primarily meant to be realized. Mendelsohn wanted to formulate a new style
ased on industrial forms and materials. The gesture of drawing coincides with
erodynamic lines, producing a formal expression of “industrial” energy. Following the
ontour of a form with one’s eyes is the only thing needed to understand the design. In
is Einstem Tower (1924) in Potsdam, Germany he attempted to represent energy
hrough mass. The form of the tower wants to show the movement that is immanent in
he building mass. Thus, there is a melding of technical function and monumentality. The
building implies the potential to leap forward, as if it contained energy.

Concerns with materials and meaning produced other variations. Fritz Héger’s Chile
House (1923) in Hamburg, for example, was a speculative office building in the tradition
of the Hamburg Kontorhaus (commercial office building). The structure is a frame built
entirely of brick. Thus, it became a counterpart to the other Expressionist material: glass.
Brick alluded to a craft tradition and was better suited to Hamburg’s damp climate. The
bricks were vitrified. In its form, the Chile House evokes the image of a ship. Its sharp
corners parallel the crystalline forms of other Expressionist architects. In general, the
form alludes to many images, such as a fish or a flag.

A group of younger architects formed the Crystal Chain under Taut’s leadership. This
was mostly a group of solitary criers in the wilderness of the industrial world who formed
a magic circle of mystery among themselves. Most of the members shared the wish for
large-scale buildings that would bring all the arts together. The letters they wrote to one
another document their attempts to go back to the roots, the origins, of creative
architectural activity. Among the most charismatic members was Hermann Finsterlin,
who had studied natural sciences and considered himself to be the Darwin of architecture.
His conception of architecture was almost biological, dealing primarily with form and
showing an evolution that dealt with biological urges and species, not with style.
Similarly, he considered his visionary designs to be natural living organisms assembled
from basic shapes. His sketches show strong anthropomorphic similarities.

In Dutch Expressionism, designing was seen primarily as an individual struggle of the
architect’s vision against materials and the construction reality. Unlike the ideological

oa ae o

roege


emphasis of German Expressionism, the Dutch School’s buildings are characterized by a
tendency toward composition and construction. Their architecture is distinguished by an
emphasis on the plastic force of the building form. Buildings were designed and
constructed according to the principles of organic growth found in nature. This was an
architecture that looked like sculpture, in which materials were molded to enclose space.
The architects used hand-formed bricks and tiles in various colors and shaped chimneys,
balconies, towers, and ornamentation as sculptural additions to the building form. In this
manner, purely functional parts were transfigured into symbolic aspects expressing the
joy of everyday life. This merger between architecture and sculpture successfully
expressed the imner aspirations of the architect and his clients. Building outlines are
simple and firm and articulated in sinuous rhythms. This allowed architects to display
emotion in their designs by endowing the building materials with their spirit and gave
their buildings a unique character that allowed the inhabitants to identify with their
homes. Architecture as art could be created only through an inward struggle. Through all
of this, the architects expressed the essential character of society as a communal whole.
In their buildings, architects tried to anticipate a better future, which also reflected a
nostalgic longing for the social fabric symbolized in medieval architecture.

Consequently, most Dutch Expressionist work is found in the area of communal, low-
income workers’ housing. Michel de Klerk and Piet Kramer attempted to renew the
existing Dutch communal housing traditions rather than inventing something completely
novel. They generally used traditional materials and construction systems rather than the
new industrial materials and structures. De Klerk’s buildings excel at making
conventional forms more piquant, primarily by presenting truncated shapes. He linked the
individual elements and units of his forms in a dynamic manner. Masses rise and fall
rhythmically, and large wall expanses are broken by terraces. His Eigen Haard Housing
Estate (1913-21) in Amsterdam is a masterpiece in sculptural modeling. De Klerk
wanted to make people happy through forms. Here, he created a fantastic environment.
The overall forms follow closely the requirements of urban architecture—namely, those
of articulating the traffic flow of the street—whereas individual details and facade
articulations are Expressionist. There are many references to the sea and the nautical
world in the forms and facades. Tile work and polychromatic brickwork are used to
provide these impressions. Cylindrical forms further emphasize the corners of the
buildings and are used to articulate communal entrances. Tower forms are also meant to
express the village nature of this estate. The entire building complex and its details allude
hypothetically to remnants from past, medieval cultures.

Rudolf Steiner represents the theosophical wing of Expressionism. His work may also
serve as an example for the innovative use of new materials of this movement. In his
Goetheanum (1927) in Dornach, he exploited reinforced concrete to achieve an
imaginative shape. This produced a unique design that has no sources or progeny. Its
form and details repeat a basic motif that Steiner had determined at the outset of the
design. Nothing in the building exists in isolation: every part and detail strives toward the
next one. Steiner’s purpose was simply to find the way to the spirit through architecture.
In this, he also showcases the mood of ideological and religious awakening of
Expressionism. He was above all interested in alluding to the spiritual states that loom
behind physical reality. For him, architecture was the medium that stimulates forms of
thought that lead to spiritual rejuvenation.

With the German economic recovery of 1923, Expressionism ceded to a more sober,
pragmatic approach to architecture. Constructing cheaply and abundantly became more
pressing needs than spiritual rejuvenation. In Amsterdam, for example, architects were
forced to use prefabricated building elements to reduce construction costs. A craft-
oriented look was replaced by industrial forms, and individualistic designs lost out
against the representation of a sober objectivity. Ultimately, the International Style
mainstream prevailed. Expressionist architecture was given a bad reputation as the
scapegoat for the adverse political reality in Germany after 1933. Siegfried Giedion
denigrated its designs as “Faustian outbursts against an inimical world,” “fairy castles to
stand on the peak of Monte Rosa,” or “concrete towers as flaccid as jellyfish.” The early
chroniclers of the International Style accused it of having reversed the push for a new
architecture that the signs of the year 1914 announced. These evaluations continued the
denunciation of Expressionism at the 1937 “Degenerate Art” exhibition in Munich,
organized by the National Socialists. It was this event that prompted Marxist critics to
proclaim that the same forces that had led to Expressionism also had led to Fascism.
Expressionism was not even accepted as a style; it was accorded value only as the
manifestation of the revolutionary fervor that existed in Germany after World War I.
Although the movement was credited with tearing down the cultural heritage of the 19th
century, it was accepted only as a synonym for opposition and lost out against the
International Style.

The view of Expressionism as simply a revolt has in the meantime ceded to one that
appreciates it as a style favoring personal creative liberty over the scientific rationality of
the International Style. Beginning in the 1950s with the Englishman Reyner Banham,
architectural critics began to reevaluate functionalism. Ultimately, this development
resulted in the postmodern dismissal of the International Style. It was also felt that
Expressionism could not satisfactorily be dealt with from only a purely formal, stylistic
perspective. Expressionism is instead seen as a broad cultural phenomenon that
encompassed a variety of artistic methods. Concurrent with this scholarly reevaluation
came a resurgence of typically Expressionist forms in architecture. Acclaimed
modernists, such as Le Corbusier and Alvar Aalto, created designs in which human
activity and existence were seen as the central architectural metaphors. Architects such as
Eero Saarinen and Jorn Utzon spearheaded the neo-Expressionist movement. The
material innovations that were produced in the American war industry finally allowed
architects to build expressive formal fantasies. Eero Saarinen’s TWA Terminal (1962) at
Kennedy Airport in New York and Utzon’s Opera House (1973) in Sydney testify to this
situation. Original Expressionists, such as Hans Scharoun and Mendelsohn, realized their
earlier visions in such designs as the Philharmonic Hall (1963) in Berlin and Park
Synagogue (1953) in Cleveland. Another significant part of neo-Expressionism is
centered around the Waldorf Schools, which had been founded by Rudolf Steiner and
which continue to imbue its school buildings, especially in England, with values identical
to those that informed Steiner’s Goetheanum.

HANS MORGENTHALER
Berlin Philharmonic Hall; De Klerk, Michel (Netherlands); Eigen Haard
Housing Estate, Amsterdam; Einstein Tower, Potsdam, Germany; Gaudi,
Antoni (Spain); Giedion, Sigfried (Switzerland); Glass; International
Style; Mendelsohn, Erich (Germany, United States); Saarinen, Eero

(Finland); Scharoun, Hans (Germany); Steiner House, Vienna; Sydney
Opera House; Taut, Bruno (Germany); TWA Airport Terminal, New
York; Utzon, Jorn (Denmark); Wagner, Otto (Germany); Werkbund
Exhibition, Cologne (1914); Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading
Benson, Timothy O., editor, Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art,
1993
Borsi, Franco, and Giovanni Klaus Koenig, Genoa: Vitali e Ghianda, and Paris:

Fréal, 1967 (contains summaries in French, German, and English)
Casciato, Maristella, editor, | Bologna: Zanichelli, 1987; as Rotterdam: 010
Publishers, 1996
Conrads, Ulrich, and Hans G.Sperlich, | Teufen, Switzerland: Niggli, 1960; as
translated, edited, and expanded by Christiane Craseman Collins and George R.Collins,
New York: Praeger, 1960; as London: Architectural Press, 1963
Franciscono, Marcel, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1971
Pehnt, Wolfgang, Stuttgart, Germany: Hatje, 1973; 3rd edition, Ostfildern-Ruit,
Germany: Hatje, 1998; as translated by J.A. Underwood and Edith Ktismer, New
York; Praeger, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1973
Pehnt, Wolfgang, Stuttgart, Germany: Hatje, 1985; as translated by John
Gabriel, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1985
Sharp, Dennis, New York: Braziller, and London: Longmans, 1966
Whyte, Iain Boyd, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1985

VAN EYCK, ALDO 1918-

Architect, the Netherlands

Advocating a new set of architectural concerns for postwar society, Aldo van Eyck
belonged to the long tradition of Northern European experimentalism characterized by an
attention to detail and craftsmanship coupled with a profound social commitment. His
oeuvre comprises a vast array of tectonic ideas worked out within the programs of
socially relevant structures, contributing greatly to modern architectures moral core.

Van Eyck was born in Driebergen, the Netherlands, on 16 March 1918; spent his
primary and secondary school years in England; and took his architectural training at the
Eidgenéssische Technische Hochschule in Ziirich. After a stint in the Dutch army, he
returned to the Netherlands and found employment in the Public Works Office (then
under the direction of Cornelius van Eesteren), charged with the task of refabricating the
war-ravaged city of Amsterdam. In 1952, he began private practice in The Hague and
Amsterdam, in partnership first with Theo Bosch and later with his wife, Hannie van
Eyck-van Roojen.

Aldo van Eyck’s introduction to the architectural community at large came during the
eighth meeting of CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne) at Hoddeston,
England, where his playground projects in Amsterdam caught the attention of Siegfried
Giedion, the organization’s secretarygeneral and one of its founding fathers. Giedion
reacted enthusiastically, writing, “These simple elements are grouped so subtly—with a
background of the De Stijl movement and modern art which injects some kind of vitamin
into the whole thing... (they also) fulfill another function. A formerly useless piece of
waste ground has been transformed by an extremely careful layout into an active urban
element. One need only provide the opportunity and we—the public, who are also maybe
children of a kind—will know how to use it” (see Giedion 1952).

Giedion’s comments confirmed the duality of van Eyck’s architectural paradigm;
namely, the coalescence of avant-garde form and a humanistic concern for the ethos of
environment, a combination that van Eyck called “labyrinthine clarity.” Not incidentally,
van Eyck’s interest in the fine arts was cultivated throughout a long friendship with
Giedion’s wife, Carola Giedion-Welcker, a prominent art historian and a champion of
Klee, Miro, Mondrian, and others. Through her tutelage, van Eyck maintained a lifelong
attachment to aesthetic ideals that would continue to inform his work. His Sonsbeek
Pavilion (1966-) in Armhem, a temporary space for an exhibition of modern sculpture,
was a successful use of orthogonal and curved planes used to create a small city within
which to literally traverse the presented artistic landscape. Putting architecture in the
service of art, van Eyck drew attention to the interrelatedness of the two practices, using
contextuality and contiguity to point to the potential enrichment of life through aesthetic
means.

The years immediately following World War II saw a radical shift in the direction
charted for contemporary architecture. Taking action against the devastation and
destruction delivered on European nations necessitated a move away from Utopian
functionalism and toward a revitalization of associative perspective and a sense of
belonging, and a younger generation of architects, known as Team X, were charged with
reorienting CIAM toward these goals. However, whereas key members such as Alison
and Peter Smithson maintained strong ties to the formalism of Le Corbusier and Mies van
der Rohe, van Eyck advocated an approach to architecture that sought to underscore the
eternal and immutable realities of humanity’s relationship to built form. By reconciling
“twin phenomena,” such as inside and outside, that denied the possibility of easy
dialectics, van Eyck sought to identify an “in-between” realm that would, in the
architect’s own words, “reconcile conflicting polarities.”

The property of “in-between” was best exemplified by his most celebrated
building, the Children’s Home (1957-60) in Amsterdam: what van Eyck
called “a home for children in the context of architecture.” Playing with
the notion of the module, the orphanage dispenses with traditional
organization of space by creating a set of pavilions pinwheeling around a
central axis; the resulting plan borrows heavily from De Stijl’s modularity
while providing strong diagonals that challenge orthogonal ordering.
Surprising occurrences of semiprivate spaces within the confines of the

building bring a sense of the outside indoors,


van Eyck, Aldo (Netherlands)

Hubertus House, Amsterdam (ca.
1959), designed by Aldo van Eyck
GreatBuildings.com

and the privacy of living quarters is ensured by their location at the periphery of the
building, away from heavily trafficked areas. The result is a series of intimate spaces that
adhere through a nonhierarchical yet clearly articulated modular program.

Although the school of Dutch structuralism, to which van Eyck’s name is often
attached, never really resolved its relationship to the larger conditions of structuralism as
obtained in literary criticism and anthropology, van Eyck’s own career drew from both of
these disciplines in a more coherent fashion. Throughout his life, he maintained a vital
attention to writing (especially during his stint as editor of the Dutch journal from 1959
to 1963), his ideas developing within the fundamental framework of his notion of
“relativity,” or the belief that human history unfolds in a way not subordinated to
preordained principles but rather through the multivalency of reciprocal relations among
people, things, and ideas. In 1959, van Eyck and his wife traveled to Sudan to study the
habitats of the Dogon, having already visited the Sahara earlier in the decade. It was there
that his notions of the perpetuity of humanity’s customs of existence found their
inspiration and justification. Many of the themes arising from his ethnographic research
recurred in later projects, such as the Hubertus House (1975—79) in Amsterdam, a home
for single mothers and their children that underscores van Eyck’s responsiveness to social
needs. A functionalist glass-and-steel recessed entryway ties the new polychromatic
structure to an adjacent older building, maintaining the sense of historical order while
insisting on the need for growth. Within the structure, lodgings presented as a set of
scaled-down row houses provide a sense of familiarity as well as reinforcing the

architect’s conviction that functionalism is not the enemy of history but rather has the
capacity to expand and enrich one’s understanding of time and place.

In 1990, van Eyck was awarded the Gold Medal of the Royal Institute of British
Architects, an award fitting his significant contributions to 20th-century architecture.

NOAH CHASIN

Biography

Born in Driebergen, Netherlands, 16 March 1918. Attended the Building School, The
Hague 1938; studied at the Eidgendéssische Technische Hochschule, Zurich 1939-43.
Married Hannie van Roojen 1943:2 children. Architect for the Public Works Department,
Amsterdam 1946-50. In private practice, The Hague and Amsterdam from 1952;
partnership with Theo Bosch 1971-82; partnership with Hannie van Eyck-van Roojen
from 1982; editor, Amsterdam 1959-63, 1967. Lecturer in art history, Enschede Art
School, Netherlands 1951-55; tutor at an art school, Amsterdam 1951-66; tutor,
Academy of Architecture, Amsterdam 1956-61; visiting critic and lecturer: University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana,
School of Architecture, Singapore, University of Trondheim, Norway 1961-68;
professor, Institute of Technology, Delft since 1968; guest professor, Eidgenéssische
Technische Hochschule, Zurich 1977-78; Paul Philippe Cret Professor of Architecture,
University of Pennsylvania 1978-83. Member, De 8 en Openbouw, Amsterdam from
1946; Dutch delegate to CIAM since 1947; member, COBRA (Copenhagen, Brussels,
and Amsterdam) 1948-51; member, Team X from 1953; honorary member, Staatliche
Kunstakademie, Dtisseldorf 1979; member, Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences,
Belgium 1981; honorary fellow, American Institute of Architects 1981; honorary
member, Bund Deutscher Architekten, Germany 1983. Royal Gold Medal, Royal
Institute of British Architects 1990.

Selected Works

Tower Room (conversion), Zurich, 1946

Approximately 650 children’s playgrounds, Amsterdam, with the Public Works
Department, 1948-79

Van Eyck Apartment (conversion), Amsterdam, 1949

Children’s Home, Amsterdam, 1960

Sculpture Pavilion, Arhem, Netherlands, 1966

Hubertus House, Amsterdam (with Hannie van Eyck), 1979
ESTEC/ESA New Conference Center and Restaurant, Noordwyk,

Netherlands (with Hannie van Eyck), 1986

Selected Publications

“CIAM 6, Bridgewater: Statement Against Rationalism” (1947), in by Sigfried
Giedion, 1954
“Dogen,” 7 (1949); reprinted as “The Interior of Time: A Miracle of Moderation,” in
edited by Charles Jencks and George Baird, 1969
“Wij Ontdekken Stijl,” 4 (1949)
“Het Verhaal an een Andere Gedachte,” 7 (1959)
“What Is and Isn’t Architecture,” 28 (1980)
“Aldo van Eyck: Annual RIBA Discourse,” (April 1981)
“By Definition,” (June 1982)

Further Reading

Groningen, Netherlands: Van de Beek, 1981
Bohigas, Oriol, “Aldo van Eyck, or, A New Amsterdam School,” 9 (1977)
Hertzberger, Herman, Addie van Roijen-Wortmann, and Francis Strauven,
(bilingual English—Dutch edition), Amsterdam: Stichting Wonen/Van Loghum Slaterus,

1982

Lefaivre, Liane, and Alexander Tzonis, “Aldo and Hannie van Eyck: ESTEC,” no. 247
(1991)

Giedion, Siegfried, “Historical Background to the Core,” in edited by J. Tyrwhitt,

J.L.Sert, and E.N.Rogers, New York: Pellegoini and Cudahy, 1952
Nicolin, Pierluigi, “The Web and the Labyrinth,” 11 (1976)

Strauven, Francis, Amsterdam: Stichting Uitgeverij, 1987; as Rotterdam:
NAi, 1996
Strauven, Francis, “The Dutch Contribution: Bakema and van Eyck,” 52, no. 4 (1992)
Strauven, Francis, Amsterdam: Meulenhoff, 1994; as Amsterdam: Architectura

en Natura, 1998
Zevi, Bruno, “Children’s Home in Amsterdam,” 6 (1961)

EYRE, WILSON, JR. 1858-1944

Architect, United States

In 1901, Wilson Eyre’s interest in domestic architecture and interior furnishings led
him to help found the magazine —a journal that was the mouthpiece for the Arts and
Crafts movement in Philadelphia. Espousing the beauty of well-integrated gardens and
homes, the magazine was coedited and illustrated by Eyre until the magazine changed
hands in 1905. By then, Eyre was a noted specialist in the design of country houses in

Pennsylvania, and his commissions took him as far afield as New Hampshire, Louisiana,
Delaware, and Michigan, leading him to establish a second office in New York City.

In 1912 he joined the firm of Gilbert McIlvaine (1880-1939) as a principal designer.
However, his architectural practice waned during the 1920s and 1930s, ultimately
collapsing with Mcllvaine’s death in 1939. By the time of Eyre’s own death five years
later, he had designed nearly 350 buildings, most of them domestic and suburban in
nature but also including a pair of hospitals, a museum, several churches and college
buildings, one office building, and a miscellany of lesser-scaled commercial and retail
establishments.

Although Eyre’s work primarily reflected his English-inspired eclectic taste, he
mastered an architectural expression that would be eclipsed by modernism, which might
explain his relative obscurity at the end of the century. In retrospect, his unwillingness to
embrace the latest modern style is not surprising, as its proponents made problematic just
the sort of vague historicity that typified Eyre’s architectural vocabulary.

Eyre sought to forge a truly American or, in many of his Philadelphia projects, a truly
Pennsylvanian architectural expression out of an architectural tradition dominated by
Europe and England. In this regard, he can be compared with contemporary California
architects, such as Bernard Maybeck (1862-1957), Irving Gill (1870-1936), and Charles
(1868-1957) and Henry (1870-1954) Greene, who sought regional styles of building.
Eyre’s country houses often featured asymmetrical massing in picturesque arrangements
with a blend of traditional and original forms and details. Large buildings allowed Eyre to
fully exercise his architectural eye, although he decried the excessive use of ornament as
well as the slavish copying of period styles. In rural or suburban settings, Eyre strove to
recall a rusticated protoEnglish aesthetic without resorting to re-creating outright Tudor,
Jacobean, or Elizabethan houses.

Eyre’s typically designed his houses based on a system of zones: one that comprised
of dining room, parlor(s), bedrooms of the homeowners, and a servants’ zone consisting
of kitchen, pantry, servants’ quarters, and other functions of utility. Eyre often
manipulated form to visually distinguish one function from the other, pushing out or
pulling in walls in an effort to articulate zones as wings or multistory masses. Consistent
window head and/or sill heights, as well as a continuous eave height, were elements used
to horizontally wrap both zones together in an integrated composition. This approach to
design was more evident in his suburban commissions than in his urban houses, as the
former afforded the opportunity to conceive buildings as freestanding objects surrounded
by and shaping an equally malleable garden space.

The Charles Lang Freer House (Detroit, 1890), a major commission, comprised a
three-story mass capped by a dominating hip roof with gables and two prominent ashlar
chimneys protruding above. This overall form abutted a two-story wing of spaces that
included the kitchen, servants’ dining room, shed, and stable, a lesser form also
punctuated by gables, chimneys, and the rounded masonry arch of the shed. The “served”
wing was organized in plan around a stand-alone fireplace located within the central
stairway hall, a space at the culmination of a carefully designed arrival sequence. The
fireplace with its woodcarved mantle was situated as a freestanding object in the center of
the great hall (an unusual design move for Eyre, who usually articulated such elements as
part of the wall plane), partly obscuring the stairway wrapping around the hall. Eyre was
a careful designer of furnishings as well as of the larger planning and articulation of


building forms, and his clients looked to their architect for exquisite detailing and a
commitment to highquality materials and craftsmanship.

In the Conklin House (Huntington, Long Island, 1905—10) the three-story central mass
was flanked symmetrically by two lesser wings, one containing servant spaces and the
other a study and a music room; the upper floors were dedicated to bedroom spaces and a
playroom. The central space is a double-height living room with a stair gallery, with
quartered white oakpaneled walls and ceiling stained a dark greenish brown. Five
carefully placed paintings taken from a European monastery were intended by architect
and owner to accompany the heavy timber aesthetic of the box beams overhead and their
accompanying knee braces. However, the focal point of this central space was a pipe-
organ panel arranged in a triptych-like composition at the far end of the space. The
intended effect was to impart a refined sense of the antique.

Eyre’s attempts to create fine details within nostalgic and tastefully proportioned
masses has placed him in the company of other contemporary Philadelphia architects,
such as Walter Cope (1860-1902), John Stewardson (1858-96), and Frank Miles Day
(1861-1918). High standards of construction remained a hallmark of Eyre’s work, and
this extended well beyond his own drawing board and onto those of the artists and
artisans whom he enlisted in many of his commissions. He associated closely with a
number of American artists, including Maxfield Parrish (1870-1966) and Alexander
S.Calder (1898-1976), and he took great effort to meld an artist’s work or a collected art
object into his own so that the overall aesthetic effect was perceived harmoniously.

JERRY WHITE
Gill, Irving (United States); Greene, Henry M. and Charles S. (United

States); Maybeck, Bernard R. (United States); Regionalism

Biography

Born to American parents in Florence, 31 October 1858; arrived in the United States
1869. Received no formal architectural training outside one year at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology; apprenticed to James Peacock Sims, architect, Philadelphia
(1882); Sims died that year; Eyre took over the practice at the age of 24. Lecturer,
University of Pennsylvania 1890-92; in 1912 became principal designer in a new
partnership with Gilbert McIlvaine; awarded the 1917 Pennsylvania American Institute of
Architects’ Gold Medal. Published in (1903-20); awarded an honorary degree from
the University of Pennsylvania (1926). Died in Philadelphia, 21 October 1944.

Selected Works

Charles Lang Freer House, Detroit, 1890
Neill House, Philadelphia, 1891
Mauran House, Philadelphia, 1891
Mask and Wig Club, Philadelphia, 1893
Conklin House, Huntington, New York, 1910

W.T. Jeffords House, Glen Riddle, Pennsylvania, 1917

F

FACTORY

The history of the factory as a building type in the 20th century parallels that of
architecture in general. However, as a new typology, it has had a fluctuating status in the
profession between that of “building” and that of “architecture.” For early modern
architects, the factory became the epitome of modernism both as a building type that
signified the modern era and in the technological innovations that were necessary to
create these buildings for the production of goods. This was the building type in which
form truly necessitated following function because the buildings are directed by the
manufacturing processes inside, from automobiles to wartime machinery and computers.
The increasing dominance and changes in methodologies for mass production influenced
the spatial and structural needs of the factories. These developments were translated into
innovations in building technologies with new uses for reinforced concrete, steel, large
glass and metal curtain walls, open floor space, lightweight suspension systems, tent
structures, and prefabricated kits of parts.

In terms of form, early 20th-century factories sustained the look of the previous
century’s multistory buildings as a result of the high cost of land that was often near the
water’s edge for easy shipping of products. In addition, before the advent of the conveyor
belt, moving goods vertically by cranes and gravity was still easier than pulling them
horizontally. This is seen in the multistory factory that Albert Kahn designed for Henry
Ford in Highland Park near Detroit in 1909, a factory that then influenced Giaccomo
Matte-Trucco’s design of the Lingotto Fiat Factory in Turin, Italy, in 1913.

Advances in the strength of concrete influenced factory design, such as in the Larkin
Plant (1907) in Buffalo, New York, built over 10 years by R.J.Reidpath & Son. This
factory could withstand larger window spans to increase natural light in the building
compared with 19th-century brick-pier construction with small windows. Concrete
improved fireproofing and allowed for faster construction, especially when it could be
prefabricated in pieces. Engineers played extremely important roles in the development
of new building systems for factories, such as Ernest Ransome’s reinforced-concrete
system, the Ransome Bar. Ransome simplified the systems of the French engineer
Francois Hennebique so that the floor slab continued to the face of the building and
became a stringcourse, with vertical pieces forming lintels and sills. Precast structural
wall units could be set in place and then cast as the floor in an early prefabricated system
with in-fill in brick. Later, prefabricated systems were developed in concrete, metals, and
glass curtain wall systems, emphasizing the use of the factory building as a testing
ground for new technologies.


In Berlin Peter Behrens designed the AEG Turbine Factory (1908-09) with Mies van

der Rohe and developed a new curtain wall system of glass and steel that allowed light
into the vast open space. Unusual at the time, the steel pier is exposed and the skeleton
revealed, creating a monumentality and a heroic metaphor for industry. The recessed
glass facade influenced the later curtain wall systems.
Factories were experimental not only in terms of structure and form but also in terms
of the management of the workers inside. Ford, who adopted the ideas of Frederick
Taylor on employee performance, believed that by providing a decent workplace,
workers would be more productive. Paternalistic in his attitude, Ford desired light and air
in the factories, encouraging Albert Kahn to use skylight monitors for daylighting.
Throughout the Great Depression, Ford influenced other factory owners to consider the
well-being of the workers because it affected their morale. Ford eventually paid workers
well enough for them to be able to afford his own product, which gave rise to a working
class with expendable income.

These American industrial buildings and the work of Behrens influenced the designs
of numerous European modern architects of the early 1920s and 1930s, such as Le
Corbusier, Gropius, and Mendelsohn. Walter Gropius, with Hannes Meyer, designed a
new building in 1913 for the Fagus Shoe Last company in Alfeld an-der-Liene, Germany.
The primary feature, the glazed workshop block, was a departure from the heavier, piered
structures and was based on the Bauhaus ideology in its lightness and transparency.

During World War II, Kahn and others designed primarily factories with one story,
which had many advantages. They were faster to build, distributed power horizontally,
and allowed more light into the building. The one-story shed-type building allowed for
larger machines and more flexible and open floor plans for the new horizontal assembly-
line production, which could then be shifted easily to the truck- and train-based
transportation systems, with train lines running close to or even through a manufacturing
plant.

The placement of the administration buildings was also a focus in the layout of a
factory complex. Early in the century, the administration buildings were usually in a
separate head house away from the plant. Alvar Aalto designed two paper mills in
Finland; one, the Toppila Pulp Mill (1930-33) in Oulu, was a design primarily for the
director’s buildings and outbuildings, whereas the Sunila Pulp Mill (1936-38) at Lotka
also included housing. Aalto also influenced the placement of the mill on the existing
bedrock and incorporated the forms of technology in his design.

In the 1950s postwar era, steel was still in high demand, so factories had to be built in
concrete. One of these was the Brynmawr Rubber Ltd. South Wales, Architects’ Co-
Partnership, which achieved the largest shell dome structure at its time in order to have
huge open floor. The increasing automation and mass production dictated open floors,
wide bays, and daylighting to reach the inner factory. The single story continued to solve
this problem best. Both Richard Rogers’ factory for Inmos in England and Nicholas
Grimshaw’s factory for Igus in Germany exemplify the high-tech prefabricated kit of
parts and repetitive modules that became widely used in the 1980s. The Financial Times
Printing Plant in London, designed by Grimshaw, with large windows into the processing
area, brought printing into the public view.

In the 1950s workers’ satisfaction and their motivation became a focus of corporate
executives, so that architects improved the quality of places for socialization, such as


workers’ lounges, cafeterias, and athletic facilities, and the Japanese influenced the
concept of teamwork, leading to different spatial arrangements. The head offices became
a part of the main building structure, so that the entire factory was under one roof for easy
communication between research teams and the production-line workers. With the advent
of computer-directed manufacturing, the need for flexible, adaptable, and expandable
spaces became increasingly dominant. Factory buildings throughout the 20th century
have become an innovative system in which architects to explore new aesthetic issues,
combined with practical building function, technological systems, and rapid construction,
that are profitable for the client while attending to the worker.

NINA RAPPAPORT

Further Reading
Banham, Reyner, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
Bucci, Federico, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1993
Hildebrand, Grant, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1974
Jaeggi, Annemarie, Berlin: Jovis, 1998; as New York: Princeton

Architectural Press, 2000
Powell, Kenneth, London: Phaidon, 1999
Reed, Peter, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998

FACTORY AND INDUSTRIAL TOWN
PLANNING

The 20th century witnessed the sublevation of industrial town planning, the culmination
of nearly 200 years of experimentation by employers in mining, lumber milling, and
manufacture. Examples of purpose-built settlements can be found in antiquity, but it was
the industrial revolution that propelled modern planning and development, creating a
distinctive and easily recognized type. Where a single enterprise owned the site and
employed an architect or landscape architect to design the factories and housing, there
was real opportunity to advance the science of planning and reduce environmenta
despoliation.

Before Parker and Unwin planned the garden city of Letchworth, England, for
Ebenezer Howard and his benefactors, they planned the factory town of New Earswick
(1902) for Benjamin Rowntree. Rowntree was a manufacturer who developed New
Earswick as a single-enterprise town, following Lever and Cadbury, who earlier had
founded Port Sunlight (1887) and Bourneville (1895), model industrial villages. The use
of contour planning and the generous allotment of parkland in the design of industria
villages was well known in the 19th century and would be employed in the first garden
cities. The principal difference between the two is that the industrial village or factory


town owed its existence to the business enterprise, whether extractive or manufacturing,
and was subordinate to the mine, mill, or factory, which could occupy a prominent site—
sometimes the center of town. The garden city, on the other hand, put community first
and then hoped to attract industry, and that industry was usually relegated to a peripheral
site. True garden cities were tenant associations of joint stockholders who were
prohibited from engaging in property speculation. In the factory town, the business
enterprise was the landlord, and where housing was sold it usually was financed by the
enterprise or one of its subsidiaries. In most instances, however, the housing was
maintained by the company and available only to employees and their families through
rental agreements.

The better factory towns of the 20th century offered a variety of houses in
construction, size, and style and made them available for purchase through a company-
backed building-and-loan association. Two- and four-family houses, as well as terraces or
row houses, eventually gave place to single-family residences in North America. The use
of contour planning as opposed to orthogonal blocks not only produced more interesting
and less repetitive layouts but also reduced street paving and utility lines. Public space in
the form of parks was sometimes incorporated into the plan. Schools and community
facilities symbolized the employer’s commitment to the community, and the architecture
could be exceptional. Unity in plan with variety in architecture could be obtained through
the selection employment of recognized design firms, such as McKim, Mead, and White
(Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina, 1900) or George B.Post and Sons (Eclipse Park,
Wisconsin, 1915). In Europe and North America, many of the more prominent architects
and landscape architects received commissions to design industrial housing estates and
factory towns.

Stand-alone single-enterprise developments included Neponsit Garden Village (1907)
and Indian Hill (1912), Massachusetts; Kistler (1918) and Kohler (1915), Wisconsin;
Kincaid (1914), Illinois; Goodyear Heights (1913) and Firestone Park (1916), Ohio;
Alcoa (1919), Erwin (1914), and Kingsport (1915), Tennessee; Corey (Fairfield, 1909)
and Kaulton (1912), Alabama; and Torrance (1912), California, in the United States and
Temiscaming (1917) and Arvida (1926) in Canada. In later years, several were
incorporated into larger, neighboring communities. This early group favored the planning
principles employed in the garden cities, although in the case of landscape architects such
as Warren Henry Manning, John Nolen, Ossian C.Simonds, and Earle Draper, their
indebtedness was to the Olmsted firm far more than to Parker and Unwin.

In the interwar and post-World War II period, it is not North America but rather
Scandinavia and Europe that offer the better examples of industrial town planning.

The work of Alvar Aalto in Finland, especially at Sunila (1937-39), the lumber town,
combines creative planning and contemporary housing in a majestic setting. Aalto,
always the independent, managed to separate the mill from the housing and communal
buildings through careful site analysis. The architectural forms are contrasted in a most
interesting way with the natural setting. In Germany and Hungary, following the
reconstruction, there were several important new industrial towns. Sennestadt and
Wulfen, two German new towns of the 1960s, associated with extractive industries,
experimented with mid- and high-rise housing in the or parallel row, arrangement
celebrated by the Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM). Dunaujvaros,
Kazincbarcika, Tiszaszederkeny, and Komlo, Hungary, built in the 1960s and 1970s, are


mining and chemical towns that, like the German towns, combine contemporary
architecture in carefully zoned land uses that separate the industrial activities from the
residential and recreational areas.

Most new towns are mixed economy, and the singleenterprise industrial town is no
longer a sought-after or viable type in North America and Western Europe. However,
secondand third-tier countries, whose economies are based on extracting and processing
raw materials for export, will continue to build industrial towns in locations where
existing towns and lack of transportation are inadequate to meet demands for industrial
growth. These new communities will benefit from the example of the previously
mentioned towns.

JOHN S.GARNER
Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne

(CLAM, 1927-); Factory; Garden City Movement; Urban Planning

Further Reading

There is no shortage of contemporary accounts of individual industrial towns in
architectural and planning journals. In the decade 1910 to 1920, there are dozens of
essays in such serials as and Secondary sources, especially the more inclusive, are
difficult to find. The following, however, should be of some assistance.

Crawford, Margaret, London and New York: Verso, 1995
Garner, John S. (editor), New York: Oxford University Press, 1992
Golany, Gideon (editor), New York: Wiley, 1978

Gregotti, Vittorio (editor), Bologna: Editrice Compositori and CIPIA, 1997
Taylor, Graham Romeyn, New York: Appleton, 1915

FAGUS WERK

Designed by Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer; completed 1911, with subsequent
expansions Alfeld-an-der-Leine, Germany

In 1910 spurred on by a dare from his former employer, Behrens Hannoverian Carl
Benscheidt had visions of opening a competing shoe factory. After he secured a site just
across the road from his former workplace in Alfeld, Germany (but with better rail access
and three hectares to build on), Benscheidt founded Fagus GmbH in March 1911 and
approached the Hannover architect Eduard Werner (1847-1923) to design his new
factory. Not only had Werner designed the plans for the Behrens factory in 1897 (which
was three times larger than Fagus would be), but he had the invaluable experience of
knowing the calculations and work involved in building a shoe last factory. In Werner’s
plan, the Fagus complex would amount to a row of brick buildings (or half timbered in
the case of the warehouses), all with different functions along the production line. With
the exception of the administrative rooms, the production houses were fairly utilitarian in

nature. Benscheidt had already expressed his dissatisfaction with this aspect of Werner’s
slightly Gothic design, and in 1911, he commissioned Walter Gropius (1883-1969) and
Adolf Meyer (1881-1929) to redesign the facades of the entire complex. Gropius had
done some exemplary work for the AEG Motor Company years before in Berlin while
under the tutelage of architect Peter Behrens, and the buildings there had not only set new
standards in factory design—practically making them works of art—but, in keeping with
the time, had also created architecture as advertisement. It was decided that Werner
would remain in charge of the project as a whole and in charge of the interior spaces and
“outfitting of the buildings.” However, it is the influence of Gropius and Meyer that gives
meaning to a contemporary understanding of the Fagus Werk. Gropius viewed this
opportunity in Alfeld as the perfect collaboration between industry and the arts—the
primary aim of the Deutscher Werkbund—and it would turn into a long-term project that
would occupy Gropius and Meyer until the end of their partnership in 1925. Because of
Gropius’s media presence during the building of Fagus, his adopted leadership of the
building program, and his frequent writings within the Werkbund on the Fagus Werk, he
is often credited solely with the design of the factory; indeed, it has been difficult to trace
exactly what Meyer’s contributions were. However, Meyer considered the
conceptualization of the factory a truly collaborative effort and kept a personal archive of
drawings throughout the life of the project.

In the spring of 1911, Gropius and Meyer submitted their plans for the complex; these
deviated from Werner’s in the positioning of the different buildings, creating courtyard
space rather than the static row of structures proposed in the Werner plan. Their plan
gave the building a much broader exposure toward Hannover and, thus, to the trains that
frequently passed the factory’s property. Benscheidt never agreed to this plan, and the
building was executed with its facade in a competitive stance toward Behrens’s, as
originally conceived. The pair ended up making few changes to the original Werner plan
and retained the overall layout of the factory complex.

However, they succeeded in carrying out a more unified scheme through their use of
materials and color. All Fagus buildings, for example, have a 40-centimeter-high purple-
black brick base that projects from the facade by four centimeters and seems to allow the
yellow-bricked rising walls of the building to float; windows in all the buildings appear to
be cutouts from the cubical structures that contain them, although the window shapes and
sizes differ from building to building. Perhaps the most daring design feature of the
Fagus Werk—and the one that makes the building so significant and recognizable—is the
vertical bands of windows that wrap around the main building, creating the illusion of a
floating curtain wall. It was presumed that to accomplish this, the architects would have
to employ some new construction technology, when in fact the frame construction was
based entirely on Werner’s original projections of a brickwork building with an iron
ceiling beam. A staircase on the clear-span side of the building acts like a stabilizing
column to the glass-clad structure. Buildings in the Fagus complex—other than the
famous, often photographed main office building—included the production hall, sawmill,
warehouse, and punch-knife department. All these buildings were visually unified with
their yellow brick, terra-cotta roof tiles, gray-slate roofs and glazing, and black bases.
The interiors of the public spaces of the office structure and the production hall were
planned by Gropius and Meyer down to the smallest details. The waiting room exuded
order, lightness, and success; glass panes offered views of the main offices from the


waiting rooms, which were friendly and informal. The architects designed dust-free work
conditions and placed the machines in sequence with the production process in a light-
filled work environment. The design offered employees a commissary, washrooms,
lockers, and later, housing.

An expansion to the Fagus Werk, led by Gropius and Meyer, began in 1913. Additions
were attached to existing structures, and the main building and production hall were
enlarged, the latter to three times its original size. Although hardly a challenging job for
the architects, the expansion allowed them to suggest the application of a glazed facade to
the production hall and the punch-knife department. This permitted them to provide a
unified appearance to the entire complex. During World War I, the work progressed
slowly as Gropius enlisted and Meyer took a job with a steel company. However,
Benscheidt continued to make plans for the expansion, and drawings continued to be
made. In 1915 some construction was allowed to commence, and the dominant
characteristic of all Fagus buildings emerged: the floor-to-ceiling glazed and enclosed
building corner.

EUGENIA BELL

Curtain Wall; Factory; Glass; Gropius, Walter (Germany)

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, London: Architectural Press, and New York: Praeger, 1960; 2nd
edition, 1967
Jaeggi, Annemarie, Berlin: Jovis, 1998; as translated by Elizabeth
M.Schwaiger, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000
Gordon, B.F., “The Fagus Factory,” 1169/7 (1981)
Scheffauer, Herman George, “The Work of Walter Gropius,” 56 (1924)

FALLINGWATER

Designed by Frank Lloyd Wright; completed 1937 Bear Run, Pennsylvania
Fallingwater, as the architect Frank Lloyd Wright named the house that he
designed for Edgar and Lillian Kaufmann, was commissioned shortly after
the Kaufmanns’ son, Edgar, Jr., joined Wright’s newly formed Taliesin
Fellowship in Spring Green, Wisconsin. Founded following the Great
Depression, the Taliesin Fellowship was instrumental in Wright’s
emergence at the age of 70 from 15 years of obscurity, signaled by the
construction of the Johnson Wax Building (1939, Racine, Wisconsin),
Taliesin West (1940, Scottsdale, Arizona), the first “Usonian House” for
Herbert Jacobs (1937, Madison, Wiscon-

Fallingwater, Bear Run, Pennsylvania
(1937)

© James Reber. Photo courtesy The Frank
Lloyd Wright Archives

Interior (living room), Fallingwater,
Bear Run, Pennsylvania

© James Reber. Photo courtesy The
Frank Lloyd Wright Archives

sin), and Fallingwater. After visiting the site for the Kaufmann house in 1934, a full nine
months passed without any drawings or other evidence that Wright was working on the
design of the house. In a famous story told by his Fellowship apprentices, Wright drew
up the design in the two hours that it took Kaufmann to drive from Milwaukee to Spring
Green on a Sunday morning in September 1935.

Wright’s design is first and foremost a brilliant piece of site planning. Kaufmann had
expected the house to be built to the south of the stream, looking north to the waterfall.
However, Wright sited the house to the north of the stream, above the waterfall, so that
the house opens to the south sun. As a result, it is the sound of the waterfall, not the view
of it, that permeates the experience of Fallingwater. Fallingwater is also the greatest
example of Wright’s capacity to draw the spaces and forms of his architecture out of the
very ground on which it is built. The house is anchored to the earth by vertical piers of
sandstone quarried 500 feet from the waterfall, the stones set to resemble the natural
strata of the rock exposed along the streambed. The floors of the house are constructed of
broad horizontal cantilevered reinforced concrete slabs that appear to float effortlessly
over the stream, for the structural beams are hidden between the flagstone floors and
plastered ceilings. As a result of these two complementary systems of construction,
Fallingwater is anchored to the ground by the stone piers even as its spaces float along
with the motion of the stream.

The spaces within Fallingwater are at once surprisingly small, with only 2,885 square
feet of enclosed space, and incredibly generous, opening in three directions to the east,
south, and west onto large exterior terraces that almost double the floor area of the house.

Glazing, set in red-painted steel frames, runs in continuous bands around three sides of
the main living and dining room, opening at the corners in celebration of the spatial
freedom given by the cantilevered structure. Wright detailed the house so as to reinforce
the integration of interior and exterior space, creating delightful moments such as the
glass that runs right into the stone wall without any vertical framing at the kitchen and
small bedrooms and the flagstones that are set into the floor of the living room so that
they appear to continue unbroken beneath the glass doors and out onto the terrace
overlooking the waterfall.
Perhaps the most poetic moment in this most natural house is the “hatch” that Wright
designed at the east side of the living room, whose glass doors may be opened to give
access to a suspended concrete stair leading down to the stream below. Descending these
stairs, we pass through the stone floor to find light stairs floating over water, in which is
reflected the sky, the roar of the waterfall behind us reverberating off the enormous
concrete slab overhead. In the living room, the dark gray color of the bedrock ledge under
the shallow water and the way in which the light is reflected from the rippling surface of
the stream are matched exactly by the waxed gray flagstone floor on which we stand. The
fireplace in the opposite corner, a half-cylinder stone cavity running from floor to ceiling,
built directly into the sandstone wall, has as its hearth the original boulder of the site, on
which the Kaufmann family formerly took picnic meals. This boulder, left unwaxed, rises
above the waxed flagstone floor like the dry top of a stone emerging above the water of
the stream.

In Fallingwater, Wright captured the perfect essence of our desire to commune with
nature, to dwell in a forested place, and to be at home in the natural world. Fallingwater is
often considered Wright’s greatest work, for he was first and foremost an architect of the
American house. In its startling integration of ancient stone walls anchored to the bedrock
and modern reinforced concrete terraces hovering among the leaves of the trees,
Fallingwater is both an organic, site-specific critique of the placeless products of the
International style and one of the greatest masterpieces of the modern movement. At the
time of its construction, Fallingwater was an instant success, the famous perspective view
from below the waterfall serving as the background when Wright’s photograph appeared
on the cover of the 17 January 1938 issue of magazine, in which he was profiled and the
house introduced to the world. More than any other single work, Fallingwater signaled
Wright’s return to preeminence in American architecture and initiated his final two
decades of incredibly prolific practice.

In its 60 years of existence, Fallingwater has proven to be one of the most influentia.
designs of 20th-century architecture, inspiring architects both near and far. This last is
exemplified by Alvar Aalto, whose Villa Mairea (1939, Noormarkku, Finland) is
indebted to Wright’s design both in its overall form and in its numerous natural details.
Fallingwater is also, and perhaps more important, ever more popular with the genera.
public, as demonstrated by the fact that nearly 150,000 people visit the house every year,
this despite its remote site. In recognition of the unique and unmatched importance of this
design, Fallingwater was named the best American building of the last 125 years by the
American Institute of Architects. Fallingwater is today, without question, the most
famous modern house in the world, reflecting its inspired embodiment of humanity’s
fundamental and timeless desire to be at home in nature.

ROBERT MCCARTER

Villa Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland; Wright, Frank Lloyd (United States)

Further Reading

Two very different but highly complementary accounts of Fallingwater are found in
Hoffmann’s comprehensive architectural history and in the habitant and client’s view
given by the son who apprenticed for Wright, Kaufmann, Jr. Insight into Wright’s design
process from the point of view of one of the apprentices for Fallingwater can be found in
Tafel. A superb photographic survey is contained in Futagawa.
Futagawa, Yokio, volume 4: Tokyo: A.D.A.Edita, 1990
Hoffmann, Donald, New York: Dover, 1978; 2nd edition, 1993
Kaufmann, Edgar, Jr., New York: Abbeville Press, 1986
Levine, Neil, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1996
McCarter, Robert, London: Phaidon Press, 1994
McCarter, Robert, | London: Phaidon Press, 1997
Tafel, Edgar, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979

FALLOUT SHELTER

The fallout shelter was a highly specialized building type developed in the 1950s in
response to the escalating Cold War tensions between the United States and the Soviet
Union. Faced with the realization that conventional structures would provide little or no
protection from an atomic blast, civil defense officials in the United States undertook a
concerted campaign to convince the American public of the necessity of building fallout
shelters in their houses and backyards. In addition to these personal shelters constructed
of brick, concrete block, or corrugated metal, efforts were undertaken to identify
sufficiently reinforced and structurally sound areas of existing buildings to designate as
larger-scale public fallout shelters. Construction of personal fallout shelters peaked
between 1958 and 1962, when a series of international crises pushed the world ever
closer to the brink of nuclear annihilation. During this period the fallout shelter became
an integral part of U.S. nuclear policy and was extensively promoted in the popular media
as a viable solution to surviving and even winning a nuclear war. Although relatively few
people actually built the structure, the fallout shelter was emblematic of the way
Americans chose to confront the atomic bomb and nuclear policy.

The first attempts to develop reinforced structures to protect inhabitants from an
atomic blast grew out of air raid shelter design from the World War II era. Although
these shelters offered a degree of security against conventional weaponry, the atomic
detonations over Hiroshima and Nagasaki underscored their futility in an age of atomic
weaponry. In the early 1950s, the knowledge that the USSR possessed atomic weapons,
combined with the American intervention in Korea, led many architects, engineers, and
civil defense officials to contemplate the design of atomic bomb-resistant structures.

These early studies concentrated primarily on the obvious physical effects of an atomic
explosion, which could extend several miles from ground zero, and underscored the
expense of designing sufficiently reinforced structures. However, it was the discovery of
radioactive fallout in the mid-1950s that provided the impetus for effective shelter design.
Far more lethal than the physical destruction accompanying a blast, fallout consisted of
irradiated particles of dust and debris carried aloft by the explosion and dispersed
hundreds and even thousands of miles downwind. With the realization that vast areas of
the country could be covered under a blanket of radioactive particles, civil defense
officials acknowledged that although those nearest a blast would be vaporized,
sufficiently prepared citizens could safely wait out the decay of fallout in cozy backyard
shelters.

As early as 1955 at least one company marketed a prefabricated shelter,
the imaginatively named Kiddie Kakoon, which consisted of a large metal
storage tank retrofitted with shelves

U.S. Naval Base, Pearl Harbor, fallout
shelter, (date unknown) Honolulu
County, Hawaii

© Historic American Buildings
Survey/Library of Congress

and bunk beds. Although these early attempts met with limited sales, following the
USSR’s launch of in 1957 Americans were increasingly ready to accept the idea of a
fallout shelter. Throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, a number of companies offered a
variety of prefabricated shelter designs. With the publication of by the Office of Civil
Defense and Mobilization (OCDM) in 1959, the U.S. government articulated a

comprehensive plan for civil defense based on the construction of small-scale single-
family fallout shelters. The plans presented in the brochure were frequently republished
in the popular media, outlining the essential components of a successful shelter design
while providing relatively inexpensive plans for shelter construction.

The fallout shelter plans provided by the OCDM fell into two main categories: those
that could be constructed within an existing basement and those separate from the main
house. Suitable shelter materials ranged from brick and concrete block to large sections
of corrugated metal buried under several feet of earth. Regardless of its intended location,
a shelter had to be designed to fulfill the following three criteria: it had to be constructed
of dense enough materials or buried deep enough to block out as much radiation as
possible; it had to provide some means of filtered ventilation to avoid the intake of
radioactive particles; and it had to be comfortable and well stocked enough for a family
to remain inside for several days or weeks. Architecturally, these criteria were met by
solid materials, airtight construction, a baffle entrance with a tight-sealing door, and
multiuse interior space that was comfortable enough for a family to eat, sleep, and
entertain one another.

Beyond the accommodation of these basic concerns, the actual design of fallout
shelters was relatively unremarkable. Besides the telltale hump in the otherwise flat
Bermuda grass of suburbia, most shelters did not have a distinct exterior presence. The
interior of the shelter focused on fulfilling its unique functional considerations as
efficiently as possible. Several popular magazines did present images of shelters
converted into clubhouses and playrooms or painted with imaginative scenes in an
attempt to make the idea of building a shelter more palatable to the general public.

Although the single-family fallout shelter remained the most visible part of the civil
defense initiatives of the 1950s and 1960s, some policymakers argued unsuccessfully for
the construction of massive community-based shelters. However, more successful was
the program initiated in the early 1960s that was designed to identify and designate
sufficiently protected spaces as public fallout shelters. Despite persistent attempts by civil
defense officials to convince large segments of the population to construct their own
fallout shelters, scarcely 200,000 shelters were built or purchased by 1963. Even as the
interest in shelter building peaked during the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, a public
debate began to rage over the efficacy and moral implications of shelter building. New
discoveries suggested that people would have to remain in shelters for years before
radioactivity would drop to safe levels, and many debated the morality of what they saw
as the vigilante mentality of shelter builders. The final blow to fallout shelter design came
with the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963, which effectively pushed nuclear testing
underground and out of sight.

Although most family fallout shelters now lie neglected in suburban backyards, others
have found life as storm shelters, storage rooms, and even wine cellars. The late 1990s
saw a limited resurgence of interest in fallout shelter design as some attempted to prepare
for the possibility of civil unrest accompanying the year-2000 computer bug.


MATTHEW S.ROBINSON

Further Reading

Walter Karp’s article provides the best overview of the fallout shelter craze of the early
1960s, with particular attention to the accompanying moral debate. For an overview of
the American reaction to the atomic age see the lucid and insightful account by Paul
Boyer. Margot Henriksen probes the deeper significance of the bomb and the role of
fallout shelters in helping to foster the American culture of dissent in the 1960s. Edward
Teague’s lengthy bibliography surveys government publications as well as architectural
journals at the expense of several significant articles in the popular media. For actual
examples of shelter designs the most representative sources are those published by the
OCDM, particularly the frequently duplicated The early approaches to the design of
atomic bomb shelters is documented in the article “Buildings Can Be Built to Resist
A-Bombs.” “Fallout Shelters” presents the architectural requirements for effective fallout
protection, while the magazine special issue “How You Can Survive Fallout” presents
several home-built and prefabricated shelter designs.

Boyer, Paul, New York: Pantheon, 1985

“Buildings Can Be Built to Resist A-Bombs,” 112 (August 1952)

“Fallout Shelters,” 108 (April 1958)

Henriksen, Margot A., Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997
Karp, Walter, “When Bunkers Last in the Backyard Bloom’d,” 31 (February/March
1980)

51 (15 September 1961) (special issue entitled “How You Can Survive Fallout’)
Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, | Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1959
Teague, Edward H., Monticello, Illinois: Vance Bibliographies, 1985

FARNSWORTH HOUSE

Designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, completed 1951
Piano, Illinois

Commissioned in 1945 and finished in 1951, the Farnsworth House is generally
regarded as one of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s most elegantly conceived and precisely
constructed buildings, easily the finest residence he put up in his later, American career.
Among his completed house designs, only the Tugendhat House (1930) in Brno, which
dates from his years in Germany, is considered comparable in quality.

The most striking feature of the Farnsworth House is its outer aspect. The walls
consist of floor-to-ceiling glass mounted behind a simple frame made up of eight steel
wide-flange piers, four to a side, that support a roof slab and a floor slab, the latter raised
some five feet above the ground. The plan is rectangular, with the axis running east and

west and the interior giving on to a deck on the west. Symmetry is qualified by a terrace
located next to the main structure along the western edge of the south, or front, elevation.
The house surveys a lawn that extends 50 yards to the north bank of the Fox River. A
short flight of cantilevered steps provides access from the ground to the terrace, whereon
a second flight, parallel to the first, rises to the deck. At that point, the visitor turns right
to enter the double-door portal. All steel components of the house have been sandblasted
and painted white.

Much of this description seems a reasonable confirmation of Mies’ reputation as a
classicist, although his inclination to deviate from that classification is apparent in the
asymmetrical position of the terrace and in the subtlety—which has escaped the attention
of many—of locating the portal closer to the south wall than to the north.

Mies’ reason for the latter device stems from his layout of the unpartitioned interior.
The single volumetric element is a core that contains two bathrooms, the kitchen
facilities, and a tightly packed space through which all utilities descend via a cylindrical
tube to the ground. Since the core has been deflected slightly to the northeast, the
surrounding space is implicitly divided by varying sizes: the largest, a parlorlike area,
with a fireplace, to the south (overlooking the river); a smaller, dining area to the west; a
long, narrow kitchen to the north; and a sleeping area to the east. By placing the portal
slightly closer to the south, the visitor on entry is likely to concentrate his attention on the
living area, while the dining area appears to gain more space for itself. The principal
articles of furniture now in place were designed by Mies, although with the exception of a
large teak storage cabinet done specifically for the house, they are reproductions dating
from his German years. The floor is heated by radiation facilitated by a small forced-air
furnace in the utility space. The house is now air conditioned, although originally the
only ventilation was provided by opening the entry door and/ or a pair of hopper
windows on the opposite, or east, elevation.

Such a summary should suffice to suggest the reductivist simplicity of the design.
Words, however, do not convey the certainty of the proportions and the excellence of the
materials, most notably the travertine floors and the prima-vera wood cladding the core.
One of Mies’ most impressive effects is gained by his decision to raise the structure
above the ground. While the functional purpose of that move was to protect the house
from the floods that occur regularly along the river, the elevated height simultaneously
and indivisibly accomplishes an aesthetic end, leaving the house—especially in view of
the transparency of its window walls and the whiteness of its framing members—in a
seeming state of levitation.

The house exerted an impact on Mies’ later work and on the larger,

American architectural scene as well. It was one of the


Farnsworth House, north elevation

© Historic American Buildings
Survey/Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division

first examples of a building type, the clear-span pavilion, that, perhaps more than any
other, preoccupied Mies throughout his post-World War II career. In addition, it attracted
a huge amount of attention from critics and designers alike, some of it negative—
especially from observers who found the very idea of a steel-framed glass house a
grievous departure from traditional concepts of domesticity—but most of it
enthusiastically affirmative. Philip Johnson, long an admirer of Mies, offered up the
ultimate compliment by fashioning his own house in a manner perceptibly indebted to the
Farnsworth House. The Johnson design diverged from Mies’ in several respects: it was
built on a symmetrical plan, with neither a terrace nor a deck nor even a substantial core,
but its very form (not to mention its excellence) rested in large part on Johnson’s
imitation of the Farnsworth model.

The Farnsworth House cannot be fairly discussed without some consideration given its
client and its subsequent owner. In requesting Mies to design the house in 1945, Dr. Edith
Farnsworth, a distinguished Chicago nephrologist with a substantial knowledge of the
arts, knew full well the merits of the architect whom she had chosen to produce a
weekend retreat for herself just south of the town of Piano, about 60 miles from Chicago.
Mies in turn appreciated the fact that Farnsworth, as a single woman using the house only
intermittently, would impose relatively few complicated domestic requirements on him.
Client and designer worked easily and cordially together in the early stages of the project.
It was Farnsworth, in fact, who voted to employ travertine, one of Mies’ favorite stones,
for the floor surfaces, and the quality of the house profited further from her willingness to
increase the budget, thus enabling Mies to use not only finer materials but also more


expensive construction devices than had been anticipated in his first sketches (piers
welded rather than bolted to the floor and roof slabs, among other things).

Nonetheless, a relationship that began on a warm footing grew chilly as the 1940s
wore on, and eventually a degree of hostility was reached that ended in a legal battle. The
reasons have never been made completely clear, but to all appearances Farnsworth at one
point decided that Mies not only had gone too far in overspending the means she
provided him with but, in her view, also had disregarded some of her more pressing
requests in the process. Mies had his own opinion about both charges, and when he sued
her for underpayment, she countersued him for professional incompetence, and the matter
ended only when the court ruled in his favor.

Despite the rupture of their friendship, Farnsworth kept the house until
1968, when she sold it to a man who turned out to be its ideal owner. Lord

Peter Palumbo, a wealthy British real

Farnsworth House, south elevation,
detail of porch seen from southwest

© Historic American Buildings
Survey/Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division

estate developer, had known and admired the house and its architect since his schoolboy
years. In 1968, having commissioned Mies to design an office building on a site he
owned in London, Palumbo learned that Farnsworth had put her Fox River house up for
sale. He approached her directly, and by 1972 he had taken full command of the property.
He made all the changes necessary to put the house in premium condition and to keep it
that way. It was he who elected to outfit it with Mies’ furniture, to install air
conditioning, and to hire the landscape architect Lanning Roper to improve the grounds.

Hardly least, Palumbo bore the enormous cost of repairing the house following a
disastrous flood in 1996 that rose unexpectedly well above the five-foot level, ruining all
the prima-vera wood of the core, breaking two of the window walls, and destroying all
the furniture.

After a half century of existence, the Farnsworth House has assured itself a lofty place
in the annals of modern architecture, testimony both to the gifts of Mies van der Rohe
and to his ultimate good fortune in having had a client as knowing (notwithstanding her
eventual displeasure) as Edith Farnsworth and as sensitive, conscientious, and generous
as Peter Palumbo.

FRANZ SCHULZE
Johnson, Philip (United States); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany);

Tugendhat House, Brno, Czech Republic

Further Reading

Schulze, Franz, Chicago: Lohan Associates, 1997
Tegethoff, Wolf, Essen, Germany: Bacht, 1981; as translated by Russell M.
Stockman, edited by William Dyckes, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1985

FASCIST ARCHITECTURE

Fascist architecture denotes the spectrum of architectural projects that were built,
theorized, ritualized, and polemically debated by Fascist political regimes of World War
II. Extreme right-wing totalitarian dictatorships were forcibly installed in Italy (1922-43),
Germany (1933-45), and Spain (1939-75). The Italian Fascist Party under the leadership
of Benito Mussolini, the National Socialism Party headed by Adolf Hitler, and the
Falange Espanola Party led by General Francisco Franco formed coercive governments
whose absolute power abolished all forms of political opposition. Public utilities,
commercial exchanges, processes of industrialization, as well as the production of art and
architecture were controlled and regulated by the state; and it was in Italy and Germany
that architecture played a seminal role in the advancement of Fascist ideologies.

The very term (or in Italian) was derived from the Latin word denoting an
ornamental object of political and military authority carried by ancient Roman lictors
during public ceremonies. As early as 1919, Mussolini adopted the fasces as the emblem
of the Fascist Party, intent as he was on associating the glories of ancient Rome with the
future triumphs of his Fascist state.

Throughout the Fascist era in Italy architecture was used as a rhetorical device; it
became the preferred vehicle for launching Fascist propaganda. It most forcefully
portrayed, in the solidity of its materials and the vastness of its measures, the sublimity of
imperial power. Buildings, piazzas, and ruins were privileged backdrops for public
demonstrations, ritual reenactments, and oratorical theatrics; spectacles aimed at

cultivating a Fascist body politic. Italian architects Giuseppe Terragni, Marcello
Piacentini, Adalberto Libera, Giovanni Michelucci, and Giuseppe Pagano participated in
the design of new building types, the inauguration of new colonies, the restoration of
ancient monuments, the staging of political rallies, the mounting of exhibits, and the
publication of polemical journals; activities that contributed to the construction of the
new Roman Empire.

From the outset, Mussolini launched a massive building campaign. The modernization
and nationalization of transportation and communication networks necessitated the
design and construction of building types new to Italian soil. Modern and efficient
railway stations and post offices were built throughout Italy. Florence’s Santa Maria
Novella train station (1932-34), designed by Gruppo Toscano (a six-member group of
Florentine rationalists), and Rome’s Palace of Postal and Telegraphic Services, designed
by BBPR (Banfi, Belgiojoso, Peresutti, and Rogers), were only two of the many building
projects sponsored by the state. It was the invention of the Casa del Fascio (House of the
Fascist Party), however, that most captivated the Italian imagination. Used primarily as
the local headquarters of the Fascist Party, versions of this new building type were
erected throughout the Italian peninsula. Typically sited in the center of town, the
structure rivaled the church’s dominance and evidenced the ceaseless presence of II
Duce. The most celebrated Casa del Fascio was built in Como (1932-36) and designed
by Giuseppe Terragni. Its monumental austerity, abstract formalism, and frontal
transparency made it the building most representative of both Italian Fascism and
modernism.

Mussolini also commissioned the construction of entirely new towns in the southern
regions of the Roman Campania, in Sardinia, in the Greek Dodecanese, and in the
colonies of northern Africa. The towns of Littoria, Carbonia, and Guidonia were built on
reclaimed swampland, whereas the occupied cities of Tripoli, Bengazi, Kos, and Rhodes
were resettled with Italian farmers. Predappio (1925), Mussolini’s hometown, was the
first to be built with wide avenues, monumental civic buildings, and a vast civic piazza.
Littoria (1932), named after the lictor who had carried the ceremonial fasces during
antiquity, was built with the knowledge of ancient Roman foundation rites.

Antiquity was equally of issue in the Fascist policy of “isolamento”: the valorization
and preservation of rhetorically significant buildings. In an attempt to make visible select
architectural masterpieces from imperial Rome, monuments from the first century BC
were liberated from thousands of years of historical and material growth. With the
demolition of entire city blocks, the Mausoleum of Caesar Augustus (63-14 BC) became
one such site. Symbolic of the burial ground of Rome’s founding emperor, the unearthing
of its sublime circular structure was completed in 1937, the 2,000th anniversary of his
birth. With a similar intent, Mussolini effected vast transformations to the via dell’Impero
(present-day via dei Fori Imperial!) by physically connecting the ruins of the Colosseum
with the administrative center of Fascist Rome—Piazza Venezia. In an effort to valorize
the Roman Forum and the Forum of Augustus, the via dell’ Impero was designed as a
monumental avenue for ceremonial and military parades.

Alongside the building of large-scale architectural interventions, architects also
participated in the design and construction of exhibits. Throughout the Fascist era, the
mounting of statesponsored public exhibitions was a significant vehicle for the promotion
of both architectural ideas and Fascist polemics. In March 1931, the International


Movement for Rational Architecture (MIAR) opened its second exhibition with a critique
of contemporary Italian architecture. The likes of Pietro Maria Bardi, Edoardo Persico,
and Alberto Sartoris called for the radical alliance of Fascist doctrine with modern
architecture, for only in this way could a true renewal of the country take place. In 1932,
to mark the tenth anniversary of the Fascist takeover of power, the (Exhibit of the
Fascist Revolution) featured the work of architects Libera, Mario Renzi, and Terragni, its
pavilions manifesting the allegiance of modernism to Fascist doctrine. However, it was
the Universal Exposition of 1942 (EUR’42) that placed the Italian Fascist state on display
through its vast complex of monumental pavilions, designed under the leadership of
Piacentini. Although the events of the war halted its completion, the polemics
surrounding the construction of EUR’42 forcefully pitted the modern rationalists against
the more conservative neoclassicists.

Journals, periodicals, and newspapers were also significant venues for the
dissemination of both architectural theory and Fascist propaganda. The printed word and
image had become highly effective means of communication, and as a former journalist
Mussolini was well aware of this truth. Marcello Piacentini served as editor for and
was edited by Pietro Maria Bardi. was founded in 1928, and in 1933 Giuseppe Pagano
had become its editor. Along with had been a vocal supporter of the Italian rationalists,
and in the final years of the Fascist regime, with increasing criticism levied against the
state, the magazine was ordered to cease production. As a result, architects Pagano and
Banfi were deported to German death camps.

In Germany, the totalitarian regime of National Socialism, led by the Fuhrer Adolf
Hitler, also privileged architecture in the communication of its ideologically charged
political agenda. In Nazi Germany architecture, of all the visual arts, was materi-ally,
spatially and structurally most representative of the dictatorial power of the III Reich, a
state intent on the political and military conquest of the Western world.

In this venture was implicated architect Albert Speer, who in 1937 was named by
Hitler Inspector General of Buildings (GBI, Generalbauinspektor). The title attributed to
Speer expansive decision-making powers and the mandate to make of Berlin a capital
embodying the tenets of National Socialism. Guided by Hitler’s own artistic imagination,
Speer embarked on the conceptualization and design of the largest building project
initiated by any totalitarian regime, the construction of a new urban plan for the city of
Berlin. The enormous project envisioned the rezoning of a vast territory of the city
through which the destruction of tens of thousands of homes would have been assured.

If actualized, the plan would have forcibly introduced a monumental north/south axis
five kilometers long, originating at the southern limit of the Tempelhof and Schoeneberg
districts and terminating at the city’s northern limit, the Spree. Lined with granite-clad
buildings, the axis would have housed the most politically significant buildings
representative of the III Reich’s major ministries and centers of power. At its northern
end, the axis was designed to incorporate the colossal Pantheonlike shaped building
called the Great Hall, conceived to gather nearly 200,000 spectators in mass celebrations
of National Socialism. But steps from the Brandenburg gate, the Great Square
immediately to the south of the Great Hall would have been surrounded by Hitler’s
Palace, the High Command of the Armed Forces, the New Chancellery, and the Old
Reichstag. And although the New Chancellery was inaugurated in January 1937, Speer
would have designed all of the square’s new buildings.


Completed as planned, the monumental scale of the north/ south axis would have
engendered a sense of domination never before achieved by human artifice. And
notwithstanding Hitler’s defeat that ensured the demise of the Berlin project, Speer
incorporated many of its architectural strategies in earlier projects for another German
city, Nuremberg. In 1936, Speer completed the redesign and extension of its Zeppelin
Field, a parade ground for the mass gathering of 100,000 citizens. In the austerity of its
neoclassical colonnade and in the massive extension of its 1,000-foot reviewing stand
was achieved a rhetorical and ideological backdrop for the orchestration of party rallies
and for gatherings of the Hitler Youth movement.

Thus, in both Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, architecture was used as a highly
articulated tool of political propaganda. That architects were directly involved in the
production and communication of such beliefs should not be overlooked but rather the
source of continued study.

FRANCA TRUBIANO

Italy; Libera, Adalberto (Italy); Terragni, Giuseppe (Italy)

Further Reading

Bruxelles: Aux Archives d’architecture Moderne, 1985
Ades, Dawn, et al. (compilers), (exhib. cat.), London: Hayward Gallery, 1995
Andreotti, Libero, “The Aesthetics of War: The Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution,”
45 (February 1992)

Doordan, Dennis P., New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1988
Ghirardo, Diane Yvonne, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1989
Ghirardo, Diane Yvonne, “Architecture and Culture in Fascist Italy,” 45 (February
1992)

Jaskot, Paul, London: Routledge, 2000
Kostof, Spiro, Berkeley, California: University Art Museum, 1973
Miller Lane, Barbara, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1968.
Millon, Henry, “Some New Towns in Italy in the 1930s” in edited by Millon and
Linda Nochlin, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1978
Schumacher, Thomas L., Rome: Officina Edizioni, 1980; enlarged and revised
edition, as Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Architectural Press, 1985

FATHY, HASSAN 1900-1989

Architect and teacher, Egypt

More than any other 20th-century architect, Hassan Fathy raised the status of earth
building among architects worldwide. Building in earth—adobe or —has a long and
honorable history, and in those parts of the world where stone and timber are scarce and
expensive, earth has remained the most economical and widely used building material.

This is certainly true in Egypt and most Arab countries. But even there, as in most of
Europe, earth, at the turn of the 20th century, had come to be identified with poverty and
backwardness, and earthen building materials were increasingly perceived by architects
and the professional middle classes in general to be old fashioned and impermanent. A
handful of architectural devotees of earth building advocated and promoted its use, but by
and large, commercial vested interests in the brick, cement, steel, and asbestos industries
almost completely sidelined earthen building materials.

Fathy, in common with many Egyptian architects of his generation, studied in France,
at the Ecolé dex Beaux Arts in Paris, and like them he acquired a love for the historic
architecture of his homeland, and for the Mameluke and Ottoman architecture of his
native city, Cairo, in particular. But unlike most of them, he acquired also a love for the
traditional vernacular architecture of the Egyptian countryside, and chiefly for the Nubian
architecture of Upper Egypt. Soon after his return from Egypt to France, he was
appointed to the staff of the Department of Architecture at the School of Fine Arts in
Cairo, of which he became Head in 1938. Under his direction, annual field study visits to
the various regions of Egypt were introduced into the curriculum.

Fathy’s growing reputation in this field brought him the commission, in 1946 from the
Egyptian government, to design and build a new village, on flat fertile land closer to the
Nile, for the inhabitants of Old Gourna, an ancient village close to the Valley of the
Kings at Thebes, who had made a living for genera-tions by robbing historic artifacts
from the Pharaonic tombs and selling them to tourists and dealers. Before this
commission, his architectural practice had consisted, in the main, of private houses for
affluent middle-class clients: the New Gourna commission transformed his practice and
almost broke him, financially and psychologically. His plan for the new settlement, his
designs for each one of the buildings in it, housing and public buildings, incorporating as
far as possible the architectural traditions of the Upper Nile valley and the building skills
of the Nubians, and his direction of the building process, were based on long and close
observation of, and consultation with, the community for which he designing.
Unfortunately, on completion of the main phase of building in 1953, the people of Old
Gourna refused to move form their old homes and to forfeit their traditional illegal source
of income. The buildings of New Gourna were not occupied, and they remained empty
for decades.

However, Fathy persevered—he remained faithful to his vision of an architecture
deriving from and drawing its inspiration from the building traditions of the Egyptian
people. His own architectural practice continued, in its modest way, until the publication
in 1969 of his account of the genesis of the New Gourna project by the Egyptian Ministry
of Culture became a turning point in his career. The Archaeology Department of the
University of Chicago had been actively engaged in the exploration, interpretation, and
conservation of the Pharaonic remains in Thebes for decades and had come to rely on,
and admire, Fathy’s profound knowledge of the building traditions of the area. Therefore,
the department sponsored the re-publication of his account of New Gourna under a new
title, in 1973.

The reissue of the New Gourna story coincided with the worldwide fuel crisis,
following the Arab-Israeli war of 1973, and in the use of locally available building
materials and building craft skills and the application of traditional principles of climatic
comfort was seen the recipe for the affordable and locally sustainable rural development

of which the developing countries of the world, in all continents, were in desperate need.
Architects and architectural students from all continents in increasing numbers made the
pilgrimage to New Gourna, or to Fathy’s home in Cairo, on the top floor of the ancient
house in Dar Al-Gabbani at the foot of the Citadel, where Fathy was to spend the last
years of his life.

This historic house, acquired by the Aga Khan and over a period of years restored
under Fathy’s direction, came to serve as a demonstration of the design principles that
Fathy advocated. Here he established the International Institute of Appropriate
Technology, of which he served as director for several years.

In the final decade of his life, Fathy undertook a vast range of commissions including
Dar Al-Islam, the Moslem arts and crafts community in New Mexico, and the Desert
Research Centre for the American University of Cairo, at Sadat City, the vast new city in
the desert overlooking the oasis of Wadi Natrun. The execution of these latter projects
would have been impossible without the support and assistance of the young architects,
Egyptians and others, who were attracted by his philosophy and personality, and whose
assistance he so generously acknowledged. Notable among these architects was Abdel
Wahid El Wakil.

ANTHONY D.C.HYLAND
Africa: Northern Africa; Aga Khan Award (1977-); Cairo, Egypt;

Earthen Building

Biography

Born 23 March 1900 in Alexandria, Egypt; educated at Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris;
graduated from High School of Engineering, Architectural Section, University of King
Fuad I (now University of Cairo), Cairo 1926. Appointed to the Faculty of Fine Arts
School, Cairo 1930; chaired the Architecture Department there 1938-48. Designed and
exhibited first mud brick projects—country houses for Lower Egypt 1937; Constructed
first mud brick structures incorporating the inclined vault—experimental housing in
Bahtim, Egypt, commissioned by the Royal Society of Agriculture 1941; delegated to the
Antiquities Department to design and supervise the project of New Gourna Village at
Luxor, to displace the inhabitants of the Old Gourna from the Antiquities Zone 1946-53.
Appointed Director of the School Building Department, Ministry of Education 1949-52.
Delegated Consultant to the United Nations Refugee World Assistance 1950; joined
Doxiades Associates in Athens as consultant. Lecturer on Climate and Architecture at the
Athens Technical Institute. Member of the Research Project for the City of the Future
1957-62. Director of Pilot Projects for Housing, Ministry of Scientific Research, Cairo;
designed High Institute of Social Anthropology and Folk Art for the Ministry of Culture,
Cairo; worked as Consultant to the Minister of Tourism, Cairo; delegated by the United
Nations Organization for Rural Development Project in Saudi Arabia 1963-65. Lectured
on philosophy and aesthetics in Town Planning and Architecture Department at al-Azhar
University 1966. In 1980, awarded the first Chairman’s Award by the Steering
Committee of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture; in 1985, awarded the first Gold
Medal of the International Union of Architects; in 1987, short-listed for the RIBA Gold
Medal. He died 30 Novermber 1989.


area in the northern state of Bahia. Rio’s favelas coincide with the occupation of the
Santo Anténio and Providéncia hills in the city center. In 1897, soldiers who returned
from the Canudos War—a military campaign in the northeastern region of Brazil—
received permission to temporarily settle on these sites, where they built shacks of
cardboard and wood. Morro da Providéncia received the name Morro da Favela (favela
hill) in reference to the previously mentioned bush. In 1904, 100 houses existed, and by
1933 the number had grown to 1500.

By the 1920s, favelas had spread to other hills of the city: Morro dos Telégrafos,
Mangueira; Morro de Sado Carlos, Vila Rica (Copacabana area); Pasmado (Botafogo); and
Babilénia (Leme). This expansion even reached the city suburbs. The growth of favelas
was driven by the lack of a government policy to address the housing problems of the
poorest members of society. In 1888, Brazil proclaimed a law of freedom for slaves; it
was the last country to do so in Latin America. The urban reforms of the early part of the
20th century almost eliminated tenement houses in the city center; such houses
sheltered approximately 100,000 people in 1890.

The peasants’ migration from the northeastern rural areas to the capital intensified the
settlement in the hills wherever vacant land was available near workplaces. The same
development took place in areas near primary transportation lines that connected the city
center to the northern zone of the city where industries were located: railroads and, later,
wide avenues. By the 1920s, one of the main suburban favelas had emerged near the
Madureira railroad station, right in front of the Imperial Palace (Quinta da Boa Vista).

The favela, throughout its history in Rio de Janeiro, was considered mainly an
undesired component of the urban structure. This vision was present at the beginning of
the 20th century in the programs of Mayor Pereira Passos (1903-06) and with the Agache
Plan in the 1930s.

The importance of the favela and its presence in the city context were recognized and
taken into consideration only to control public hygiene and epidemics. From the 1940s to
the 1960s, the slums were considered to be an urban-order disruption, and their
population was seen as alien to the urban society, so the government policy for favelas
was simply to remove them from areas near the “formal” city. The Alliance Progress, a
U.S. government aid program, was created to resettle the who rejected the program,
which foresaw single apartment blocks located far in the periphery. At the same time,
religious organizations, municipal initiatives, and sensitive architects (such as Carlos
Nelson Ferreira dos Santos) helped several communities transform precarious shacks into
houses of bricks and concrete and to furnish technical infrastructures, such as stairs,
electricity, water supply, sewage, and garbage systems. Most of the favelas are still
concentrated along the railroad system in the northern area of Rio; others are old,
traditional settlements near the “noble” southern neighborhoods, such as Botafogo,
Copacabana, Ipanema, Leblon, and Sado Conrado, with a privileged view over the
marvelous natural environment. Rocinha, one of the largest and steadiest favelas of the
city, has almost 100,000 inhabitants; Vidigal has 10,000, and Santa Marta 5000. The
latest report shows that in 1999, one million people were living in 600 favelas in Rio de
Janeiro.

Favela in Vidigal section of Rio de
Janeiro

© R.Segre

One could define as romantic the claim that there are some positive social, cultural,
and urban components in those settle-ments, denying the negative opposition between
“formal” and “informal” city. The free articulation of volumes and colors of housing
units along the hills was admired by Le Corbusier during his visit to Rio in 1929. Bernard
Rudofsky, who lived for several years in Brazil, recognized the spatial and formal quality
of irregular urban structures and its vernacular huts before writing his book . The
relationship between medieval cities and modern metropolises as defined by the French
historian Jacques Le Goff is present in the favelas’ urban structure. However, this free
composition is related to individual and social appropriation of space that creates for
inhabitants a sense of community and solidarity. This is reaffirmed by religious activities
that make up the syncretism of Afro-Brazilian rituals and by the meaning of popular
music (samba) and carnival shows, icons of culture around the world. Some of the most
important and oldest of Rio’s carnival belong to traditional favelas: Salgueiro,
Mangueira (Estacdo Primeira de Mangueira); Serrinha (Império Serrano); Formiga; and
Borel (Unidos da Tijuca). Writers, poets, singers, and film directors used favelas as the
main subject of their creative work. In Brazil, several films assumed this popular

environment: in the 1950s, Frenchman Marcel Camus directed the film which diffused
the life and music of Rio’s favelas, as did | (Humberto Mauro, 1935), (Nelson Pereira
dos Santos, 1955),  (Murilo Salles, 1990), and (Caca Diegues, 1998). However, there
is a dark side of favelas: In the last two decades, lottery managers and drug dealers have
taken over control of the population.

In the 1990s, the municipal government of Rio de Janeiro, with the initiative of the
former secretary of urbanism, architect Luiz Paulo Conde (city mayor in 1997), and the
secretary of housing, architect Sergio Magalhaes, decided to develop a longterm plan to
integrate the “informal” city (favelas) into the “formal” urban structure. The key change
in the municipal government’s programs is the replacement of the idea of dealing only
with the deficit of adequate housing for a policy that focuses on “producing the city”
through readdressing the urban deficit.

The new program, Favela-Bairro, started serving 90 favelas with a population of
300,000 inhabitants and counted on an investment of U.S. $300 million, of which 40
percent came from the City of Rio and 60 percent from the Inter-American Development
Bank (BID). To integrate the favela into the urban fabric of the formal city, the program
includes the following key actions: (1) completing or constructing main urban
infrastructures; (2) providing environmental changes that ensure that favelas look like
standard neighborhoods; (3) introducing visual symbols of the formal city as a way to
identify favelas as neighborhoods (paved streets, parks, urban furnishings, and public
services); (4) consolidating and inserting favelas into the planning process of the city; (5)
implementing social types of activities, such as setting up day care centers for children,
income generation processes, training programs, and sporting, cultural, and leisure
activities; and (6) promoting the legalization of land subdivision and providing individua
land titles.

In 1994, the housing secretariat organized, in cooperation with the Brazilian Institute
of Architects (IAB, Institute de Arquitetos do Brasil), a competition for designing a
methodology to develop improvements, beginning with 18 medium-size favelas (between
500 and 2500 dwellings). An important innovation was the organization of 15 teams, led
by architects who partici pated in the competition that presented new ideas and
methodological approaches. The competition included firms of young architects, such as
Planejamento and Arquitetura, Fabrica Arquitetura, Arquitrago Cooperativa, and Archi 5
studios, as well as those of older, prestigious works, such as Paulo Casé, Luis Aciolli, and
Mauricio Roberto, who for the first time would undertake design for the poorest members
of Rio’s population. This initiative promoted a new relationship between technica.
expertise and the degraded areas of Rio de Janeiro to attempt to improve the quality of
life of people living in favelas.

ROBERTO SEGRE
Brazil

Further Reading

Abreu, Mauricio de A., Rio de Janeiro: IPLANRIO, 1988
Amaral de Sampaio, Maria Ruth (editor), Sao Paulo: FAU-USP, FAPESP, 1998
Bonduki, Nabil, Sao Paulo: Estacao Liberdade, 1998

Casé, Paulo, Rio de Janeiro: Relume Dumara, 1996
Rio de Janeiro: Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro, Secretaria Municipal de
Habitagao, 1999

Duarte, Cristiane Rose, Osvaldo Luiz Silva, and Alice Brasileiro (editors), Sao
Paulo: Pro-Editores, 1996
Fessler Vaz, Lilian, and Mauricio Abreu, “Sobre as origens da Favela,” in 1 (1991)

Magalhies, Sergio F., “L’esperienza di Rio de Janeiro: Favela-Bairro,” 374 (1998)
Rio de Janeiro: Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro, 1992
Ribbeck, Eckhart, “Favelas, Drogen und Folklore,” 134 (1997)
Segre, Roberto, Mexico City: Siglo Veintiuno Editores, 1977
Valladares, Licia do Prado, Rio de Janeiro: Zahar Editores, 1978
Zaluar, Alba, and Marcos Alvito, Rio de Janeiro: Fundagao Getulio Vargas Editora,
1998
Zuenir Ventura, Sado Paulo: Companhia Das Letras, 1994

FEDERAL CAPITAL COMPLEX,
BRASILIA

Designed by Oscar Niemeyer, completed 1960 Brazil

The free and vigorous forms of Oscar Niemeyer’s works, such as Pampulha (1943)
and Canoas House (1954), were already internationally recognized when he visited
Europe in 1954. Niemeyer was impressed by classical buildings he saw there—their
monumentality and their sense of permanence. This led him to introduce new concepts in
his architecture. Niemeyer started to emphasize pure and concise forms as well as single
volumes die-tated by structure in order to achieve monumentality. The opportunity for
Niemeyer to concretize this new vision came when he was commissioned to design the
buildings of Brasilia, the new planned capital of Brazil, built between 1957 and 1960.

Adopting the main principles of modern urbanism, Lucio Costa’s plan for Brasilia
achieved an appropriate expression of a capital with two axes crossing each other in right
angles. The composition, resembling a plane, is very simple, unified, clear, and elegant.
In the curved wings of the north-south axis (road axis), Costa placed the residential areas.
The east-west axis (monumental axis) is a sort of dorsal spine that organizes the entire
plan. At the east end of the monumental axis, Costa located the governmental center,
Three Powers Square, as a focus of the composition.

The Three Powers Square is a great esplanade for public ceremonies and provides an
aesthetic and symbolic space for all the city houses. Following Costa’s triangular scheme,
Niemeyer placed in each vertex a building representing the three main powers: Planalto
Palace (executive), National Congress (legislative), and Supreme Court (judiciary).
Niemeyer concentrated his major efforts on the creation of this ensemble.

Niemeyer conceived these palaces as an entity, conferring formal unity and a general
classical monumentality on them. He created three poles of visual attraction with many
perspectives. The buildings are self-contained objects in the vast landscape, separated by

large surfaces of stone paving that provides a free space to admire them and creates a
scenic civic place. The ensemble of the Three Powers is a unique architectural complex
in which classicism is joined with lightness.

From far away, the powerful National Congress (1958-60) appears,
announcing the termination of the axis. Niemeyer placed two domes on a
vast platform that emphasizes the horizontality of the complex. Based on a
play of volumes, the complex was intended to express formally the duality
of the two assemblies. According to Bruand, the inverted dome, the
Chamber of Deputies, symbolizes the more democratic facet of this
assembly, whereas the smaller dome, the Senate, appears to be more
reclusive (see Bruand, 1971). Between the domes, two high thin slabs are
placed, housing the secretariat. The balance of the final composition is
also achieved by contrasts between vertical and horizontal lines, between
curves and straight lines, and between the pure forms of platform, twin
towers, and

National Congress Complex, Brasilia,
Brazil (1958-1960)

© Bettmann/CORBIS

Oscar Niemeyer, model, National Congress Complex (1958-60),
Brasilia, Brazil

(published in: Damaz, Paul, Art in Latin American Architecture, New
York: Reinhold, 1963, p. 120)

domes. It was designed in order to preserve the openness of the mall while maintaining
its symbolical importance.

In the other vertices of the triangle are the Planalto Palace and the Supreme Court
(1960). Both buildings are rectangular glass boxes encased in a peristyle with
magnificent colonnades. Niemeyer, in order to enhance the whole, reduced the number of
formal elements and emphasized the single motif of the curving colonnade as the
strongest facet of the composition. The delicate and curving colonnades, barely touching
the ground, endow the buildings with lightness and grace. The widely projecting roof
slabs supported by thin columns create many opportunities to frame the vast landscape.
As they are inscribed in a larger composition, they have similar features, differentiated by
disposition and size that confer unity upon the esplanade as imagined by Costa. Whereas
the Planalto Palace is taller and more delicate, the Supreme Court is closer to the ground,
communicating stolidity and stability. Whereas Planalto’s long side is facing the square,
the Court has its narrow side facing it. This arrangement creates different perspectives but
maintains axiality and unity, which provide the classical character required by
institutions.
The innovative motif of colonnades is a variation of that of Alvorada Palace (1958),
the official residency of the president, located near the ensemble although not part of it.
One of his most acclaimed works, Alvorada Palace had its image widely diffused and
became a symbol of the country. The curving and slender columns, delicately touching
the ground, graciously support the shaded veranda. As David Underwood noted, the airy
structure “synthesizes Brazilian charm with European decorum, classical nobility with
baroque plasticity.” Niemeyer’s ethereal and fluid suspended palaces are meaningful
freestanding objects in the vastness of the square.


The mall also includes two rows of ministry buildings. These discrete and anonymous
blocks are aligned consecutively in order to create a sort of scenic and ceremonial space,
directing the attention to the Three Powers Square. Closer to this square are the
Ministries of Justice (1960) and Foreign Affairs (1965-67), designed differently from the
others. In these buildings, Niemeyer adopted a Brutalist aesthetic; at same time, however,
they are refined and sophisticated. Instead of delicate colonnades, Niemeyer opted for
heavy concrete porticoes as expressive ele-ments. At the end of the mall is located the
Metropolitan Cathedral (1958-70), one of Niemeyer’s masterpieces. The volume is
formed by a structure of 16 boomerang-like ribs, expressing the essence of the cathedral.
The entrance through an underground passage leads the spectator to experience a
dramatic contrast from the shadows to an intensely illuminated and mystical space. The
most recent contribution by Niemeyer is the Pantheon of Democracy (1985), a poetic,
fluid, and dynamic structure that closes the open side of the Three Powers Square.

As soon as Brasilia was completed, it was both praised and criticized. In the
architectural field, it was celebrated by many critics. However, others pointed out the
failure of the climatic adaptation of the buildings and its rupture with traditional Brazilian
living. Siegfried Giedion criticized the lack of coherence of the monumental axis, as it
fails to reproduce a theatrical perspective. Although the capital was conceived as a
coherent whole, it is not felt by the pedestrian, who feels powerless in such a vastness.
Sybil Mohdély-Nagy pointed out the autoritarianism and the monumentalism of the new
city. James Holston shows how Brasilia failed regarding its social purposes (Holston,
1989). In a moment in which the principles of modern urbanism were under fire, Brasilia
seems to have been born already old.

Nevertheless, the attacks on modern urbanism and the fact that Brasilia was a social
failure eclipsed some positive aspects of its architecture. First was Brasilia’s role in the
discussion of modern architecture and monumentality. Niemeyer’s delicate and lighter
classicism proved that modern architecture could also be monumental and symbolic
without regressing to the massive authoritarianess of 1930s government buildings.
Second was Brasilia’s unique image. Niemeyer sucessfully created an image for the city
based on a repetition of some patterns, fostering formal unity although admitting
variations in textures and materials that contributed to the city’s inclusion in the World
Heritage List of UNESCO. Third was Brasilia’s role as a symbol for the country. Brasilia
was planned to foster a new Brazilian man, a proof of the capacity of a country to build
its future. Much more than housing institutions, the main achievement of Niemeyer was
the creation of a cultural image for a modern state, providing poetic and symbolic forms.

FERNANDO DINIZ MOREIRA

Brazil; Brasilia, Brazil; ; Costa, Lucio (Brazil); Niemeyer, Oscar (Brazil)

Further Reading
Association Internationale des Critiques d’ Art (AICA), La Cite Nouvelle, 7 (1960—
1961)
Bruand, Yves, Paris: Université de Paris, 1971 Evenson, Norma, New

Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1973
Gorovitz, Matheus, Sado Paulo: Projeto, 1985

Haskell, Douglas, “Brasilia: A New Type of National City,’ 113 (November 1960)
Holston, James, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989
Moholy-Nagy, Sybil, “Brasilia: majestic concept or autocratic,” (October 1959)
Niemeyer, Oscar, “Depoimento/Testimonianza,” 6 (1960)

Niemeyer, Oscar, Rio de Janeiro: Vitéria, 1961
Niemeyer, Oscar, Rio de Janeiro: Revan, 1992
Niemeyer, Oscar, J.O.Penna Meira, Carlos Alves Souza, et. al., “Brésil, actualités:
Brasilia,” 31 (June-July 1960)

Petit, Jean, Paris: Bibliothéque des Arts, and Lugano, Italy: Fidia Edizioni d’ Arte,
1995
Puppi, Lionello, | Milan: Mondadori, 1987
Underwood, David Kendrick, New York: Rizzoli, 1994
Underwood, David Kendrick, New York: Braziller, 1994

FEHN, SVERRE 1924-

Architect, Norway

Sverre Fehn began his career after graduating from the Oslo School of Architecture in
1949. He is one of a number of post-World War II Norwegian architects who believed in
bestowing universal modernism with both regional and site-specific values, espousing an
architecture that, while always rational, recognized local crafts and culture, mythology,
and folklore. His concerns with the topography of the site, climate, local identity, and
tectonics are central to issues of both regionalism and phenomenology in architecture.

In 1950, Fehn joined the Progressive Architect’s Group of Oslo, Norway (PAGON), a
division of the Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM), along with his
former teacher Arne Korsmo, architectural theorist Christian NorbergSchulz, and design
collaborators Grung and Ostbye, among others. CIAM was a network concerned with
how ideas of modern architecture and town planning were communicated internationally.
Although CIAM had no direct influence on his own work, he would have been
acquainted with many leading contemporary architects and artists through his association
with the Congress.

Between 1952 and 1953, on the advice of Jorn Utzon, Fehn made a journey to study
the so-called primitive architecture of Morocco. This journey was seminal to his
recognition of eternal themes in architecture, values that existed long before being
embraced by the functionalist doctrine of modernist theory. Fehn remarked on the mutual
harmony between the structure of natural and man-made place and the relationship
between the ground and constructed form, as well as the clarity, simplicity, and common
sense of regional architecture regarding systems of environmental control, planning, and
construction and how these systems characterized rituals of habitation. It was a journey of
recognition rather than discovery that helped Fehn see clearly the character of his native
Norway as well as the qualities in the works of earlier modernist masters, such as Le
Corbusier, Louis Kahn, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, and Frank Lloyd Wright.

The poetic modernism of Fehn’s architecture derives from a unified and formal
relationship between the site and the physical and psychological dimensions of the
program and of the people who inhabit his buildings—reduced to a conceptual clarity and
expressed through material construction. He describes architecture as a necessary
interference with nature, in opposition to it yet also revealing the character of the
landscape. His buildings articulate a relationship between earth, sky, and horizon, a
recurring theme that is developed through his writings and drawings.

Fehn’s buildings are generally constructed of concrete or brick and wood used in a
modern rather than traditional way: mass construction to anchor the building to the
ground and timber construction to articulate openings in walls or the connection between
roof and wall. His timber detailing is reminiscent of the traditions of Nordic boat building
and of Japanese architecture. Modular repetition and geometric configuration of structure
give spatial definition to both interior volume and exterior surface. The ground plane of
his interiors often relates to the natural topography of the site and to external views.

The works of Fehn date back to 1949, when he, with G. Grung, won an international
competition for the design of the Craft Museum at Lillehammer. The winning project was
never built. Subsequent works and projects typically have been for houses and museums
but also include designs for religious, community, education, and recreational buildings.

During the late 1950s and early 1960s Fehn’s designs for the Norwegian Pavilion at
the Universal Exposition in Brussels (1958), now demolished, and his Pavilion of the
Nordic Nations in the Gardens of the Biennale (1962) in Venice, Italy, garnered
recognition. Both buildings employed Miesian qualities of a regular grid with a free plan
and featured roofs that masterfully controlled the natural light within the exhibition
spaces. The Schreiner House (1963) in Oslo, named “Hommage au Japon” by Fehn for its
references to spatial relationships and construction in Japanese architecture, consisted of
a structural timber fame around a brick central service core—a device developed from his
time in the 1950s with Jean Prouvé, an architect noted for his industrialized fabrication
and servicing systems. Planning and volumetric geometry developed with the designs of
the houses for Arne Bodtker (1965) and his brother Carl (1967, extension 1985).

The masterpiece of his work in the late 1960s and 1970s, however, is the
Archbishopric Museum (1979) in Hamar. The site is a ruined medieval
fort over which a 19th-century U-shaped barn was built. Space, light, time,
and the programmatic requirements of the museum are brought together
by a series of concrete ramps and walkways that pass through the barn
structure, hover over the medieval excavations, and lead into the
courtyard. Parallels with this project can be made to the Castelvecchio
Museum by Carlo Scarpa, whom Fehn met while working on the Pavilion
of the Nordic Nations in Venice. Fehn’s


Archbishopric Museum, Hamar,
Norway (1979)

© Richard Dargavel

Archbishopric Museum, Hamar,
Norway (1979), interior

© Richard Dargavel

ability to develop a clear dialogue among client, site, structure, and form is further
exemplified by the Villa Busk (1990) in Bamble. A rocky outcrop chosen by Fehn
dictates the physical dimensions and orientation of the house, the linear form of which is
broken by a cross axis from the entrance of the main house to a timber tower that in turn
provides visual and physical links to the fjord. As with the Hamar museum, a modulated
timber structure distinguishes between roof and wall and allows for views out and light
in. Fehn’s approach set out in Villa Busk is continued in different contexts with the
Glacier Museum (1991) in Fjzerland and the Aukrust Museum (1996) in Alvdal.

Much of Fehn’s work has been in suburban or rural locations, some inaccessible for
long periods because of the harsh winter climate. Certain competition projects, notably
his design for the Royal Theatre of Copenhagen in Denmark, confirm his capability for
both large and urban projects.

RICHARD G.DARGAVEL

Denmark; Expo 1958, Brussels; Glacier Museum, Fjaerland Fjord,
Norway; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Norberg-Schulz,
Christian (Norway); Norway; Scarpa, Carlo (Italy); Utzon, Jorn

(Denmark)

Biography

Born in Kongsberg, Norway, 14 August 1924. Studied at the Oslo School of
Architecture; degree in architecture 1949. Married Ingrid Louberg Pettersen 1952:1 child.
Private practice, Oslo from 1949. Received scholarship from the French government to

work in Paris

for the office of Jean Prouvé 1953-1954. While in Paris befriended Le

Corbusier. Professor, Oslo School of Architecture 1971; Carnegie Distinguished

Professor, Cooper Union, New York 1980. Designed the Exhibition of Medieval Art

(1972) and the Exhibition of Chinese Warriors (1984-85) at the Art Museum,
Hovikodden. Lecturer, Architectural Association, London 1981-89; Saarinen Professor,
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 1986. Founder, Norwegian division of CIAM;
member, Order of Leopold, Belgium. Awards include the Grand Gold Medal from the
Académie de 1’Architecture of Paris 1993; the Henry Tessenow Prize 1997; and the

Pritzker Prize

‘or Architecture 1997.

Selected Works

Retirement Home, Okern, Oslo (with G.Grung), 1955
Norwegian Pavilion at the Universal Exposition in Brussels, Belgium, 1958
Pavilion of the Nordic Nations in the Gardens of the Biennale, Venice, Italy, 1962
Schreiner House, Oslo, 1963
A. Bodtker House, Oslo, 1965

Community

Centre, Boler, Oslo, 1972

Villa, Norrképing, Sweden, 1964

C. Bodtker Houses 1 and 2, Oslo, 1967; extension, 1985
Sparre House, Skedsmo, 1967

Archbishopric Museum of Hamar, 1979

School for Deaf Children, Skadalen, Oslo, 1977

Atelier Holme, Holmsbu, 1997

Brick House, Baerum, 1987

Villa Busk,

Bamble, 1990

Glacier Museum, Fjerland, 1991

Prototype E

cological House, Norrképing, Sweden, 1992

Aukrust Museum, Alvdal, 1996

Selected Publications

Norberg-Schulz, Christian, and Gennaro Postiglione, with an introduction by Francesco
Dal Co, New York: Monacelli Press, 1997
Nobuyuki Yoshida (editor), A+U, 340/1 (1999)

Further Reading

Fjeld, Per Olaf, New York: Rizzoli, 1983
Giardiello, Paulo, 60 (June 1996) [Aukrust Museum]
Gronwold, Ulf, “Archaic Modernism: Two Houses, Oslo,” 179 (February 1986)
[Bodtker House | and 2]

Lavalou, Armelle, “Sverre Fehn: Un Moderne en Norvége, avec |’esprit du lieu,”

L’architecture d’aujourd’hui, 287 (June 1993)
Miles, Henry, “Horizon, Artefact, Nature,” 200 (August 1996) [Villa Busk]
Norri, Marja-Riitta, and Marja Karkkdinen (editors), Helsinki: Museum of Finnish
Architecture, 1992

FEMINIST THEORY

Feminist theory in 20th-century architecture encompasses identification of gendered
power relations in architectural and urban form and discourse, critique of masculine
dominance in the design professions, and creation of “feminist” and “feminine”
architectural practices. Influenced by feminism in philosophy, literature, cultural studies,
and the social sciences, feminist architectural theory has embraced histories of women in
architecture, new types of architectural practice, and the reconceptualization of the
“feminine” itself. In architecture, feminist theory has three main tendencies, all of which
address gendered power relations and the injustice of masculine domination in
architecture. Some theorists celebrate the differences between men and women and take
an overtly feminist approach to the critique and reconstruction of architectural practice
and history. Others emphasize the struggle for equal access to training and jobs in
architecture and for recognition of women’s competence in the profession. Another group
focuses on theories of gender difference and representation in the built environment,
architectural discourse, and cultural value systems.

Feminist architectural theory has its sources in 19th-century feminist thought and the
revival of feminism in the 1960s. Betty Friedan’s book (1963) marked the emergence
of a second wave feminism in the United States and, later, around the world. This
feminism emerged from the civil rights and anti- Vietnam War movements of the 1950s
and 1960s, just as 19th-century feminism developed from abolitionism. “Women’s
liberation” focused on the pursuit of civil rights and equality. During the 1960s and
1970s, this strategy evolved into the analysis and challenge of gendered power relations.
Feminists recognized that while the struggle for equality is ongoing, it left intact the
epistemological and representational sources of inequality. They turned their critique to

language, social relations, spatial hierarchies, education, history, art, and other means for
preserving gender-based relations of power.

In light of the new emphasis on representation and language among feminists, the
work of Simone de Beauvoir became central to feminist theory; her book is considered
one of the greatest works of 20th-century feminist theory (published in France in 1949,
translated into English in 1952). Its importance lies in the clarity with which Beauvoir
summarized women’s condition; in she traced the history of women’s reduction to
objects for men, their status as man’s Other without control over their actions or
subjectivity. Beauvoir demonstrated that this assumption dominates social, political, and
cultural life. Further, she noted that women internalize this objectified vision as normal
and enact their prescribed roles within patriarchy.

Feminist theorists and architects have created alternative practices and histories of
architecture. In liberal feminism, there has been a conscious continuity between feminist
history, theory, and practice, on the premise that changes to representation of the past
contribute to the struggles of living producers. Doris Cole, Dolores Hayden, and Susanna
Torre, for example, produced explicitly feminist histories of women in architecture and
design. Others, such as Doreen Massey and Leslie Kanes Weisman, authored critiques of
the sexism and discrimination against women embedded in and enforced by the built
environment. Prominent women practitioners, such as Denise Scott Brown and Patricia
Conway, have been advocates for women in professional institutions and critics of
masculinism in architecture culture.

Gender theories have been produced by specialists in many disciplines as well as
architecture, such as philosophy, anthropology, geography, film studies, and cultural
studies, the result of increased interest in theory among architects and in architecture
among theorists of other discourses. French philosophy and psychoanalytic theorists,
including Héléne Cixous, Jacques Derrida, Luce Irigaray, Julia Kristeva, and Jacques
Lacan, have had a particularly strong impact on feminist theory in architecture. The range
of gender theory in architecture encompasses textual analysis and philosophical inquiry
(Bergren, Grosz, and Ingraham); architectural history read through feminist, postcolonial,
psychoanalytic, and poststructural theory (Celik, Colomina, and Friedman); critical
interpretations of gender and identity in architecture culture and the built environment
(McLeod and Sanders); and complex work that interrogates gender construction and blurs
the boundaries between theory and practice (Bloomer and Diller). This work can be
created by men and women since women’s equality is not the central, political aim of
gender theory; it analyzes and ultimately rejects the dichotomy between masculinity and
femininity.

According to early feminist theorists, the sexual binary male/ female constructs a
series of negative values that define the female as passivity, powerlessness, death, the
natural, irrationality, and the Other, whereas the male connotes activity, power, life, the
cultural, rationality, and the Self. This hierarchical value system is imbedded with
oppositions relating to sexual difference. It generates meaning by placing terms such as
“nature” and “culture” in opposition; meaning is acquired only by acknowledging the
other term. A crude model for understanding sex and architecture might define the
masculine as the alienating, technological outsides of buildings and the feminine as their
nurturing, comfortable insides. In this formula, the phallus/exterior stands alone, projects,
occupies space as an object, and is coupled with technology and logic. The


womb/interior, in this account, protects, creates space, shelters humans, and is affiliated
with sensuality and materialism. The problem with such a theory is that it reduces
architecture to a series of biologically-based metaphors without interrogating the social
and cultural constitution of the linked terms. That is, it attributes fundamentally
“feminine” or “masculine,” universal essences to female and male biology (their sex),
which are represented in cultural and social phenomena such as buildings.

In the 1970s, feminists made a crucial distinction between biological (their sexual
organs and their biological functions as women) and (their social identity and the
cultural associations of the feminine). The term “sex” seemed, to many feminists, to
consign men and women to fixed roles, and they seized on “gender” as a more fluid,
socially constituted category. Beauvoir’s famous assertion “One is not born a woman,
but, rather, becomes one” summarizes the split between sex and gender. Sex implied that
being a woman was an innate, biological state, whereas gender connoted the process by
which female humans became “women.” Beauvoir noted that “the individuals that
compose society are never abandoned to the dictates of their nature; they are subject
rather to that second nature which is custom.... It is not merely as a body, but rather as a
body subject to taboos, to laws, that the subject is conscious of him-self.” Gender is,
therefore, a culturally and socially constructed category of difference, not fixed or stable;
according to feminist theorists, it has no “natural” basis.

The idea that there is an “essential” women’s nature or experience was further
challenged during the 1980s; feminist theorists rejected “essentialism” because it reduced
women to a homogeneous image based on their bodies (their biology) and a universal
“woman’s experience” that was the same for all women regardless of their age, race, or
class. Women of color criticized white feminists for creating an exclusively white,
middle-class image of women. Informed by critiques of essentialism, feminists have
scrutinized dominant, stereotypical images of women and assumptions about gender
roles, often through a parody of the pervasive mechanisms of the media. Writers and
critics such as bell hooks and Adrian Piper have investigated the ways racial difference is
interconnected with sexual difference in dominant regimes of power.

Recent feminist theory has challenged the sex/gender dichotomy itself as an
ideological construct. Judith Butler has defined gender as more than the imposition of
meaning on “sex”; gender is the very cultural and discursive processes by which the
sexes are established, according to Butler. Lesbian critics, such as Monique Wittig, have
challenged the heterosexual bias of straight feminism and the inadequacy of the
male/female binary, positing a transgressive character of lesbian identity, neither
stereotypically “feminine” nor “masculine.” The essays collected by Joel Sanders in
explore such reconceptualizations of gender, sexuality, and identity in architectural
discourse and design.

Feminist theorists in architecture have turned to a critique of the masculinist
underpinnings of architectural discourse, both written and formal. A central concern of
feminist theory has been the definition of the architect as a masterful, socially isolated
individual whose gentus and vision are imprinted on his designs. The conflation of the
male body, illustrated by Vitruvius’s famous diagram of a male circumscribed by a circle
and a square, exemplifies the dominance of a masculine norm in architecture. It is
precisely this model that feminist theorists reject, seeking new models of identity and
practice. The interrogation of the architect’s position in society informs feminist practices


such as Matrix and Liquid Incorporated founded on collaboration rather than individual,
competitive action. Diana Agrest has critiqued the history the Vitruvian model and
provided an alternative based on the theory of (feminine writing). According to Agrest,
women can place themselves outside the system of architecture by reconfiguring their
marginal position and creating an architecture of the repressed, denied, excluded, and
hidden.

More recently, feminist theory in architecture has returned to the themes of the body
and the everyday experience of women. Feminists have used fashion, the home, and
domesticity as a central theme in their work and have produced commentaries, parodies,
historical critiques, performances, and alternative practices to critique architecture
culture. Jennifer Bloomer’s work, for example, plays with language to create new forms
of thought and expression in both writing and design. Her essay and project “Abodes of
Theory and Flesh: Tabbles of Bower” reads the foundational texts of architecture, from
the Renaissance to the present in order to analyze the relationships between the feminine
and ornamentation, the masculine and structure. In a series of important essays (see the
works by Agrest, Coleman, and Fausch), Mary McLeod has dissected gender, fashion,
modernity, “otherness,” and the everyday in relation to the feminine in architecture
culture.

The simultaneous appearance in 1996 of three major anthologies of feminist writing
on architecture signaled the significance of feminist architectural theory. These
collections joined a growing body of work (see, for instance the works by Bergren,
Colomina, and Fausch) that interrogates the social construction of sexual difference in
architectural history, theory, and practice. In their introduction to Diana Agrest,
Patricia Conway, and Leslie Kanes Weisman claim that “women writing on architecture
today are exploring history, the uses of public space, consumerism, and the role of
domesticity in search of ‘ways into’ architecture, often through alternative forms of
practice and education.” Francesca Hughes, in contends that “the absence of women
from the profession of architecture remains, despite the various theories, very difficult to
explain and very slow to change.... One simple and obvious reason for [the lack of
feminist criticism in architecture] is the very small number of architects who might
choose to apply feminist criticism to architecture: a constituency most easily identifiable
as women architects.” By contrast, Debra Coleman, Elizabeth Danze, and Carol
Henderson, editors of propose a strategic relationship between architecture and
feminism that would be forged “out of the desire to produce intertextual work that
contests an unjust social order.”

PATRICIA MORTON
Agrest, Diana, and Mario Gandelsonas (United States); Postmodernism;
Poststructuralism; Scott Brown, Denise (United States)

Further Reading

Agrest, Diana, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1991
Agrest, Diana, Patricia Conway, and Leslie Kanes Weisman (editors), | New York:
Abrams, 1996

Beauvoir, Simone de, 2 vols., Paris: Gallimard, 1949; as _ translated by H.M.Parshley,
New York: Knopf, 1952; London: JonathanCape, 1953
Bergren, Ann, “Architecture, Gender, Philosophy,” in edited by John Whiteman,
Jeffrey Kipnis, and Richard Burdett, Chicago: Institute for Architecture and Urbanism,
1992
Berkeley, Ellen Perry, and Matilda McQuaid (editors), London and Washington,
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989
Bloomer, Jennifer, “Abodes of Theory and Flesh: Tabbles of Bower,” 17 (April 1992)
Brown, Denise Scott, “Room at the Top? Sexism and the Star System in Architecture,” in
edited by Ellen Perry Berkeley and Matilda McQuaid, London and Washington,
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989

Butler, Judith P., New York: Routledge, 1990
Celik, Zeynep, “Le Corbusier, Orientalism, Colonialism,” 17 (1992)
Cole, Doris, Boston: i press, 1973

Coleman, Debra, Elizabeth Danze, and Carol Henderson (editors), | New York:
Princeton Architectural Press, 1996
Colomina, Beatriz (editor), | New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1992
Fausch, Deborah, et al. (editors), | New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1994
Friedan, Betty, | New York: Norton, and London: Gollancz, 1963

Friedman, Alice T., New York: Abrams, 1998
Grosz, Elizabeth A., New York and London: Routledge, 1995
Hayden, Dolores, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1981
Hughes, Francesca (editor), Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996
Ingraham, Catherine, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1998
Massey, Doreen, | Cambridge: Polity, and Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1994
Matrix, London: Pluto Press, 1984

Millett, Kate, Garden City, New York: Doubleday, and London: Virago, 1970

Moi, Toril, London and New York: Methuen, 1985

Morton, Patricia, “The Social and the Poetic: Feminist Practices in Architecture, 1970—
1999,” 26 (2000)
Pollock, Griselda, London and New York: Routledge, 1988
Rendell, Jane, Barbara Penner, and Iain Borden (editors), London and New York:
Routledge, 2000
Sanders, Joel (editor), New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996
Torre, Susana (editor), New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1977
Weisman, Leslie Kanes, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1992

FENG SHUI

Feng Shui dates from before the earliest dynasty in China, when its principles were first
used to locate family graves to ensure good luck for all future descendants. Loosely
translated as “wind and water,” the term refers to the practice of discerning the

harmonic arrangements of natural elements so as to enhance the flow of the life force, or
Chi; for Western audiences, the term is most directly defined as “geomancy” or
“divination.” In the context of design, Feng Shui encourages a healthy and ecological
pproach to the built environment, such that humans and nature live together in the best
possible relationship. In creating a sensitive environment, Feng Shui not only balances
the natural forces of the universe but also cares for the psychic well-being of humankind.
Feng Shui does not deny the cyclical forces of nature, which ultimately ensure that good
and bad luck ebb and flow at different times; rather, its primary goal is to achieve the
optimum balance between contrasting opposites to the benefit of human existence.

Feng Shui’s principles center on the idea that the Chi must flow freely in and around
the human environment. A positive flow of Chi will have a positive influence on
humankind, allowing one’s labors to reach their highest level of success. According to
Feng Shui masters, the Chi can radiate with lesser and greater force up from the earth.
The strength of the Chi can be read from the natural elements and the physical
appearance of a location. For example, mountains and volcanoes show where the Chi has
risen above the earth, whereas arid deserts demonstrate a lack of Chi. Feng Shui masters
can measure the quantity of Chi present in an area by observing the soil and vegetation
and noting the position of natural elements, such as mountains and waterways, relative to
a particular site. Humankind is also an element in determining the relationship between
the earth and the Chi, and the human body can, like the earth, demonstrate a good or bad
flow of Chi. Healthy bodies are seen as a reflection of a good and positive flow of Chi,
whereas sickness indicates an unhealthy element. Because there is no end and no
beginning to Chi, humans can be both the cause and the solution to the negative flow,
such that the person influences the flow of the Chi in the environment or the environment
affects the level of Chi in the person. In either case, the problem can usually be corrected
by following the guidance of a Feng Shui master.

In observing the flow of the Chi, Feng Shui requires that the contrasting forces of
nature be balanced in harmonic arrangements. This principle is explained through the
concepts of Yin and Yang, which are identified by a half-white, half-black circle. Yin and
Yang represent dualities, or opposites, within the Chi, such that together they balance into
a whole. For example, Yin is dark, passive, and female, whereas Yang is light, active, and
male. Generally, these primordial forces are seen as complementary, and they symbolize
the harmony of the universe, for without the one, there cannot be the other. Feng Shui
seeks to balance the two by matching the Yin elements with the Yang. In terms of
landscape, an area that is rich in Yin might lack Yang and thus will not bring good
fortune to the owner. In many cases, however, a deficiency of either Yin or Yang can be
corrected by the placement of certain objects—mirrors, fishbowls, or plants—to reflect
and enhance the flow of the missing element.

Feng Shui masters can further discern the flow of Chi through the use of trigrams.
Like coins, trigrams have two outcomes, whole or broken, which are represented by one
long straight line or two short ones, respectively. Trigrams usually come in sets of three,
thus making eight individual arrangements of long and short lines. Each of these patterns
represents a quality (nature, heaven, earth, thunder, mountain, fire, wind, lake, and
water), and they may also represent family relationships, directions, time, and change.
When properly aligned with a compass, trigrams can ensure that the proper placement of
furniture, doorways, windows, and rooms occurs under the most favorable conditions.

2


Trigrams can been seen as types of omens, but they also ensure that the cycles of humans
and nature are respected and remind humanity that the universe is never static.

The principles of Feng Shui encourage buildings to be placed, designed, and arranged
with reference to particularly lucky attributes within the landscape. Feng Shui masters
recommend that houses and offices be sheltered on their north side by a mountain or hill
and that a source of water be placed to the south. Houses should always face south to
appreciate the sun and the fresh winds from that direction, and they should be set up on
the land rather than down in a hollow. In plan, houses should not have windows or doors
opposite each other and should not have sharp angles or tight proportions. Particular
rooms should be located farther from others; for example, the kitchen should not open
directly onto the living room, and the stove should be in the southeast corner. For interior
decor, beds should be elevated from the ground and should not face the west, unless the
resident’s astrology says otherwise. Beds should also not be positioned opposite open
doors or too near the windows, as this will affect sleeping patterns. Other furniture may
be placed according to a Feng Shui compass that directs which sections of the room will
be lucky, thus encouraging the prosperity of the family.

Feng Shui is still practiced today not only the East but in the West as well. In China,
Feng Shui masters are routinely consulted for readings on projects that range from houses
to skyscrapers. Most recently, I.M.Pei’s Hong Kong Bank was positioned according to
Feng Shui principles, with a hill behind it and a gentle slope leading to the harbor in
front. Once completed, the Hong Kong Bank was regarded as having favorably respected
the principles of Feng Shui, unlike its neighbor, the Bank of China, whose sharp corners,
domineering scale, and shiny facade negatively affected the surrounding neighborhood.
Residents complained that the Bank of China’s mirrorlike facade reflected bad elements
back to the neighborhood and that the sharp angles cut into the local businesses like
knives. Since its completion, the Bank of China has not been well regarded by the
population and has had some trouble finding tenants. In the West, Feng Shui has become
popular among designers who respect the principles of harmony and balance with nature,
and Feng Shui experts are routinely consulted for interior decorating and even for
architectural design. Despite their age, the principles of Feng Shui resonate with a
modern society that still strives for a healthy, balanced lifestyle.

CATHERINE W.ZIPF
Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong; Pei, I.M. (United States)

Further Reading

Many useful books that explain the principles of Feng Shui are readily available in any
local bookstore. Most of these books address the application of Feng Shui to the home;
see O’Brien for an example. A good history of Feng Shui can be found in Rossbach
(1998). For information on Feng Shui in the garden, see Keswick.
Brown, Simon, San Francisco: Thorsons, 1996
Hyder, Carole J., Minneapolis, Minnesota: Hyden Enterprises, 1998
Keswick, Maggie, New York: Rizzoli, 1978
Knapp, Ronald G., Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1999

O’Brien, Joanne, and Kwok Man Ho, Shaftesbury, Dorset, and Rockport, Maine:
Element Books, 1991
Rossbach, Sarah, New York: Penguin, 1991

Rossbach, Sarah, New York: Viking Press, and London: Sidgwick and Jackson,
1998
Simons, T.Raphael, | New York: Crown, 1996
Skinner, Stephen, Boston and London: Routledge and K.Paul, 1982

Wydra, Nancilee, Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1996

FERRISS, HUGH 1889-1962

Urban designer, United States
Best known for his dramatic depictions of the monumental architecture of a futuristic,
urban utopia, Hugh Ferriss contributed significantly in the 1920s and 1930s to an
appreciation for urban design within academic and professional circles, but more so
among a lay audience. Although he was a licensed architect, he chose not to build. He
dedicated his career to drawing, writing, and urban planning, becoming the preferred
renderer and consultant to some of the most notable practitioners of his day. Although
Ferriss shared with his modernist peers a belief in architecture’s agency in improving
urban society, he rejected the industrial references assumed in many of their proposals.
He sought to invest his designs with a spirituality that he felt absent both in international
style modernism and in an America dominated by corporate activity; the skyscraper—the
new icon of that activity—became his fundamental subject. His writings remained less
polemical and ultimately less influential than those of his modernist contemporaries,
whereas his widely circulated images became more influential. Although the last decades
of Ferriss’s career paled in comparison to his earlier notoriety, in the 1940s he could stil
be lauded by such populist magazines as as “U.S. architecture’s most grandiose seer.”
Ferriss’s fame as an urban-design visionary proceeded from a pragmatic issue. After
New York City passed its zoning ordinance in 1916, which was intended to improve the
access of light and air into cavernous streets, new buildings were required to reduce their
massing as they rose in height. Ferriss’s “four stages” zoning envelope studies, published
in 1922 in collaboration with the architect Harvey Wiley Corbett, show the gradua
erosion of a tall block into a series of variously sized, adjacent, parallel slabs and were
the first studies to make architectural sense of this zoning legislation. He championed his
zoning solution, stating that the “efficiency and health of city life must be accepted as
mandatory requirements,” and he reinforced his brand of modernistic architectura.
moralism and determinism, saying, “We are not contemplating the new architecture of a
city...we are contemplating the new architecture of a civilization.” In 1930, the historian
and critic Sheldon Cheney wrote, “More than any other architect... Ferriss influenced the
imagination of designers, students, and public. Many a building of 1928—29 looks like a
fulfillment of a Ferriss idealistic sketch of four or five years earlier.” Indeed, his zoning
study became a model for tall structures throughout the United States.


Most of Ferriss’s renderings stemmed from commercial commissions for clients who
wished to join, for their benefit, 1920s economic optimism with the progressive spirit that
his drawings invoked. He also collaborated frequently with architects of the caliber of
Raymond Hood and Wallace Harrison and became the public-image-giver to projects
such as Rockefeller Center, the United Nations, Lincoln Center, and the New York
World’s Fair. Despite the fact that Ferriss had an aesthetic penchant for the architecture
of modern capitalism, he recognized the skyscraper as “a symbol of an age in which there
is no spiritual-ity.” Yet he believed that capitalism’s power might be used to reform the
city. His commercial work became intellectual and formal fodder for his theoretical
explorations, which strove to reinvest architecture with humanistic dimension. Unlike
most of his modernist peers, who may also be called “visionary,” Ferriss maintained that
modem technology was stifling the human spirit and chose to regard the city as an
extension of nature rather than the machine. He emphasized organic, geological, and
metaphysical analogies in reference to the “crystalline” properties of his architecture.
Ultimately, Ferriss’s intentions rarely transcended symbolic gesture.

Ferriss’s best-known publication, (1929), was a testament to his rendering talents,
his idealism, and his commitment to fashioning structures whose effect would restore
architecture’s lost emotional content. The book was divided into three parts. The first
part, “The City of Today,” features many of the tower renderings that established his
career. The second part, “Projected Trends,” depicts work ranging from his realistic
zoning studies to such fantastic proposals as multitiered streets clinging to the 20th story
of a building facade. Ferriss recognized the far-fetched nature of his proposals, yet he
surmised that they were nonetheless inevitable. The final part of the book, “An Imaginary
Metropolis,” summarizes his design theories for a Utopian city. In his Metropolis, vast
boulevards slide through a midrise urban fabric and link mile-high towers with gardens
arranged on the ledges of their stepped-back massings. For all its visionary appearance, it
was formally little more than a City Beautiful scheme; with no provision for industrial

sectors or housing, it addressed only a bourg
a triangulated business, art, and science
philosophy,” underscored Ferriss’s desires

eois citizenry. The city’s core, comprised of
zone punctuated by a soaring “tower of
for a humanistic city yet proffered no

plausible social, political, or economic theory by which to implement the new society.
Ironically, the publication of his urban scheme coincided exactly with the financial
collapse of 1929, sobering his faith in architecture’s reach.

Ferriss’s second book, (1953), was far less ambitious in scope. Produced
following a journey across the country, the book portrays what he considered to be
America’s most inspirational structures, ranging from recently completed hydroelectric
dams to pre-Columbian pyramids. Almost embarrassed by his earlier naiveté, he began to
dedicate his drawing skills to built and pending designs rather than imaginary
architecture; his rejection of capitalism’s ability to work for social change is signaled by
the book’s near absence of high-rise towers.

Although Ferriss was alternately considered an architectural theorist and a delineator
of remarkable talent, history has established him only as the latter. Ferriss rejected the
Beaux-Arts representational tenets that he was taught at Washington University in St.
Louis; he felt that emphasis on two-dimensional drawing—plans, sections, and
elevation—was foreign to human experience. Likewise, he rejected the isometric
representations used by his staunchly modernist peers, stating that such techniques


yielded passionless images and, by extension, passionless architecture. Ferriss conveyed
his ideas nearly exclusively through perspective. The drawings for which he ultimately
became renowned were noteworthy not for their accuracy (he took technical liberties in
order to show multiple vantage points in one view) but for their emotive capacity.
Ferriss-conceived architecture revealed through a subtractive process, leaving ultimately
finely chiseled masses where historical ornament was subjugated to smoothly massed
surfaces. After building up layers of carbon, he would begin to reveal the form of his
subject through erasure, yielding scenes whereby his architecture would appear as a
brilliant beacon. If the purpose of the setback ordinance was to suffuse the city of
darkness with light, then his system of erasure and the dark-to-light techniques of his
drawings were an appropriate parallel to this transformation. Although Ferriss’s work
continued to be well received by the general public, professional and academic
communities tended to be less generous. In 1954, six years before Ferriss’s death in New
York City, the architectural historian Vincent Scully dismissed Ferriss as “the last in a
line of romantic-classic architectural artists which began with Piranesi and Boullee.”
PAUL DUBELLET KARIOUK
Hood, Raymond (United States); Harrison, Wallace K., and Max
Abramovitz (United States); Rockefeller Center, New York City; United

Nations Headquarters, New York City

Biography

Born in St. Louis, Missouri, 12 July 1889. Attended the School of Engineering and
Architecture at Washington University in St. Louis from 1906-11; moved to New York
City in 1913; between 1913 and 1915, employed by Cass Gilbert during the final stages
of the Woolworth Building. Married Dorothy Lapham, an art editor and illustrator for
in 1914. In 1915 opened his own freelance rendering office, which he maintained until
his death; included renderings in the 1925 “Titan City Exhibition” in New York City—
the most significant exploration to that date of the future city; invited to hang his first
solo show, “Drawings of the Future City,” at New York’s Anderson Galleries 1925; his
publication in 1929 of coincided with the start of the Great Depression; renderer and
consultant to the New York World’s Fair (“Building the World of Tomorrow”) 1936-39;
awarded an “Arnold W.Brunner” grant from the Architectural League of New York in
1940 and began journey across the United States, collecting material for (1953); solo
show at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York 1942; renderer and consultant
to the United Nations design project 1946-49. President of the New York chapters of the
Architectural League and American Institute of Architects. Died in New York City, 29
January 1962.

Selected Works
Zoning Envelope Studies (with Harvey Wiley Corbett), New York City, 29 January 1922

World’s Fair (delineator and design consultant), New York City, 1939
Rockefeller Center (delineator and design consultant), New York City, 1940

Turin, south of the center, to the west of the Po River on the via Nizza. There they could
improve their production methods and built a production space at an unprecedented scale
for European industries.

In 1912, Agnelli, Fiat’s founder, impressed with Ford’s automobile plants which he
had seen in Detroit, returned to Italy with the desire to build a factory similar both in
construction and production techniques. By hirmg an engineer, Giacomo Matté Trucco,
to head the development, Agnelli immediately signaled the direction of the project.
Construction began in 1916 as a way to promote work and labor instead of war. It also
established his dynasty and the company’s growth; similar to the patriarchal attitude of
Ford, he wanted to help the working class.

Matté Trucco, trained at the Politecnico (Polytechnic Institute) of Turin as an
industrial engineer, spearheaded the production engineering and building planning. Based
on Taylor’s scientific theory of efficency for productive work and constant
mechanization of labor force, the production line was a continuous flow from the entering
of the raw materials to the assembly of the parts, and to the completion of a car and was
exemplary in factory design at the time.

The factory complex consisted of a main production building with smaller buildings
for preassembly work, and a separate office building, called the Palazzina (little palace),
completed in 1921. The design of the management offices was more traditional than the
plant itself, with a doric portico at its entrance. The main production building was often
compared to a skyscraper lying on its side and was without cellars or basements. It
comprises two long workshops that run parallel for a third of a mile and connected at the
ends, creating an elongated ring. At regular intervals, the long sides are linked by
towers—two inside and one at each end—to create the four interior courtyards. At the
south end is a square press-shop; on the north, a five-story building is part of the
assembly workshop.

The building composition exemplified efficient auto production of the time: Assembly
was begun on the ground floor, then cars were then taken up spiral ramps to consecutive
upper floors for further assembly and, finally, to the roof for a test drive on the track. This
was actually opposite to the Ford system, where the auto parts were taken up to the top
floor and then the car was assembled as it descended to lower floors and finally out to the
street. However, by the time Fiat Works was built, it was out-of-date, as Ford had begun
his single-volume one-story factories.

Fiat Works is significant as one of the first modular concrete buildings in Europe.
Matté Trucco was influenced by the work of the French engineer Francois Hennébique,
whose structures Matté Trucco had seen with his engineer father. Matté Trucco repeated
a square reinforced concrete module, 19 feet 8 inches by 19 feet 8 inches by 16 feet 5
inches high, to construct a 1664-foot-long (1/3 mile) by 264-foot-wide and 88-foot-high
building with four interior courtyards.

Within the modular concrete grid there are over 2000 steel sash-awning multiple-
paned windows that admit plenty of daylight to the interior spaces. Square concrete
columns with chamfered edges that, architectural critic and historian Reyner Banham
noted, were like those in the factories in the United States, are spaced six meters apart to
create as open an interior as possible. More innovative were the perforated horizontal
beams with regular rectangular holes for pipes and conduits.


The two major engineering accomplishments include the one-kilometer-long rooftop
test track and the two poured-inplace spiral ramps at the north and south ends of the
factory. The truck-size ramps are outstanding sculptural constructions that move cars to
the roof track for testing without eliminating valued manufacturing space. The ramps
were also used for hand trucks and for pulling car parts floor to floor. The ovular rooftop
test track with banked curves at each end allowed cars to be tested at speeds up to 60
miles an hour, exceeding normal highway speeds at the time.

Renowned architects praised Fiat Works when it was completed. Le
Corbusier described the factory after his visit there in the 1920s as where

“the windows in a grille-like pattern are

Lingotto Fiat Works, Turin, Italy
(1926)

© Francesco Venturi/CORBIS

too numerous to count. The top is like that of a taffrail of a ship, with decks, chimneys,
courtyard and catwalks. Surely one of industry’s most impressive sights.... It is the Esprit
Nouveau factory, useful in its precision and with the greatest clarity, elegance and
economy” (Banham, 1986).

Edoardo Persico wrote of it in 1927 as the “ultimate metaphysic of form” and said of
the track, “so here the car and its speed are celebrated in a form that presides over the
work of the factory below, not only in terms of unity but also following a secret standard
that governs the ends of things.”

The building is significant not only in architectural history but in social history as
well. After it was built, it had to be part of emergency plans for post-World War I
assistance. During the Depression, the company had the normal internal troubles. In
1943, it was bombed, but the structure resisted destruction as Turin workers faced


Mussolini. Then in the 1980s, when the plant closed, demolition was considered. Instead,
Fiat held an ideas competition for reuse, which architect Renzo Piano won, and
subsequently transformed the building complex into a conference center that opened in
1995.
NINA RAPPAPORT
Banham, Reyner (United States); Concrete: Factory; Kahn, Albert

(United States); Piano, Renzo (Italy)

Further Reading

Banham, Reyner, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
Persico, Edoardo, _ edited by Giulia Veronesi, 1964, Milan: Edizioni di Comunita, as
quoted in Reyner Banhan, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
Rappaport, Nina, “Linking Lingotto to the City and the Future,” (October/November
1993)

FINLAND

Twentieth-century Finnish architecture, with few exceptions, has moved within the flow
of contemporaneous international developments. Within this larger construct, Finnish
architects have simultaneously developed qualities that are particular to the cultural and
natural condition of the country. Over the past half-century, the Finns have not forsaken
modernism but have continued to examine and inspect its potential, creating a legacy of
superb works in architecture and planning.

Toward the end of the 19th century, a growth in national self-awareness occurred in
Finland as well as in other European countries. Although this nationalism was partially
based on an interest in seeking national cultural origins, it was also fostered by the
establishment and growth of democratic institutions that accompanied industrial
development. In response to the repression of the regime of Czar Nicholas II during the
1890s, Finland sought political independence through national self-assertion. Within the
Finnish arts, the search for a national cultural identity resulted in a movement known as
National Romanticism.

With the 1849 edition of the the Finnish national folk epic, the arts were provided
with powerful poetic imagery that led to the development of a national form of artistic
expression that moved from painting to music and eventually to architecture. The music
of Jan Sibelius and the paintings of Akseli Gallén-Kallela express this urge toward
national identity. For architects, the question of the period was, What qualities were
required for a national architecture? The Finnish Pavilion for the 1900 Paris World’s Fair,
by the firm Gesellius Lindgren and Saarinen, was the first occasion for a public
expression of National Romanticism. The work contained many of the formal features
that would characterize National Romantic architecture: picturesque compositions with

irregular asymmetrical plans and masses employing tactile and rough materials. Ragged
and irregular building volumes and profiles are complemented through the use of heavily
rusticated masonry surfaces, protruding log ends, and numerous textural variations in
materials. Often, the ornamentation featured motifs derived from Finnish nature and
folklore: bears, squirrels, and other animals, along with pinecones, tree boughs, and the
occasional character from folklore were sculpted decorative motifs.

The work of Gesellius, Lindgren and Saarinen and of individuals such as Lars Sonck,
Selim Lindqvist, Usko Nystrém, and the architect Vivi Lénn exemplified the very best of
Finnish National Romanticism. Hvittrask (1902), the home and studio of Gesellius,
Lindgren, and Saarinen, combines the organizational pattern of a Finnish vernacular farm
complex with massing elements from medieval stone churches. The interiors continue
these direct references and include an interlocking log living space and a sitting room
decorated like medieval church vaults. The Pohja Insurance Building (1901) and several
apartment complexes in Helsinki are of rough masonry construction that references the
work of American architect Henry Hobson Richardson. Among the most powerful works
of the period was the firm’s National Museum (designed 1901, completed 1915), which
incorporates direct references to Finnish medieval churches and fortresses. Lars Sonck’s
best work of the period includes the Eira Hospital (1905), a bank interior (1904), and the
Richardson-influenced Telephone Building (1905), all located in Helsinki. However, his
Tampere Cathedral (1907) is a true masterpiece: it is a fully integrated work of art and
architecture, assimilating a variety of references into a bold, assertive building. Other
important works of the period include Usko Nystrém’s evocative Valtion Hotel in Imatra
(1903) and Onni Tarjanne’s National Theater (1902). Many of the works of this period
were important cultural buildings symbolizing Finland as an emerging nation with a
sophisticated population.

Finland had several women architects practicing during this period, all of whom
attended the Polytechnic Institute in Helsinki. Although Signe Hornborg and Signe
Lagerborg-Stenius engaged in major commissions during the National Romantic period,
it was Vivi L6nn who was a major force during the first two decades of the 20th century.
Her best National Romantic work, all located in Tampere, included the Finnish Girl’s
School (1902), the Alexander School (1904), and the Central Fire Station (1908), along
with other educational and domestic projects.

Two buildings, although appearing National Romantic, signal the movement toward a
more classical approach to design among Finland’s architectural leaders: Eliel Saarinen’s
(the partnership was dissolved by 1907) Helsinki Railroad Station (1914) and Lars
Sonck’s Helsinki Stock Exchange (1911). Both works have a classical restraint and
control and eschew the compositional excesses of National Romanticism. Although
National Romanticism had provided Finland with an international reputation, the style
seemed regressive and heavy. The younger architects desired to generate a purer and
more rational form of expression. The exaggerations of National Romanticism gave way
to a classicizing tendency emergent throughout Scandinavia before World War I.

Finnish classicism of the 1920s is exemplified by the use of simply proportioned
geometric volumes with sparsely decorated stucco surfaces. The flat, stuccoed surfaces
with crisply modeled classical appointments recall the neoclassicism of early 18th-
century Finnish architects Carl Ludwig Engel and Carlo Bassi and the simple classically
inspired architecture found in the towns and villages throughout Italy. Despite their


classical uniforms, the buildings of the 1920s contain a number of nonclassical
characteristics. The plan orders are often distorted, making use of asymmetrical
compositions rather than axial or symmetrical ones. A freer disposition of plan elements
occurs to accommodate both functional necessities and the exigencies of context. The
work of Hilding Ekelund, J.S.Siren, Erik Bryggman, Sigurd Frosterus, and Alvar and
Aino Aalto embrace this direction.

Two major works, J.S.Siren’s Finnish Parliament House (1931) and Sigurd Frosterus’s
Stockmann’s department store (1930), both in Helsinki, are serious realizations of Nordic
classicism. The Parliament House, with its columned front surmounting a monumental
flight of stairs, is an essay in restraint and repose. The interiors are well resolved and
expertly detailed, creating an integrated work of form, space, and decoration. The
Stockmann’s department store is more muscular in bearing because of its use of masonry.
The massive vertical brick facade, clear profiles, and culminating copper roof are
balanced by the large, skylit interior central space.

Four women architects made major contributions during this period: Eva Kuhlefet-
Ekelund, Kerttu Rytkénen, Elsa Arokallio, and Elsi Borg. Kuhlefelt-Ekelund designed
one of the exceptional buildings of the era, the Private Swedish Girl’s School (1929) in
T6616. Rytkénen executed the exciting, more idiosyncratic Salus hospital (1929) in
Helsinki. Arokallio’s work for the Ministry of Defense as well as in private practice and
her Kauhava barracks (1928) are marked by a strict and elegant classicism. A crowning
work is Elsi Borg’s Jyvaskyla Rural Parish Church (1928), with its clear geometric
shapes, arresting details, and expressive use of color.

Commercial buildings in addition to housing complexes were executed in
this form of classicism. This was a period of growth and urban expansion
in Finland’s major cities—Turku, Helsinki, Tampere, and Jyvaskylia—and
the simplicity of the forms and their responsiveness as urban design
elements made classicism a suitable style for these developments.
Buildings in the 1920s by Alvar and Aino Aalto in Jyvaskyla and Turku

and by


Jyvaskyla Worker’s Club, designed by
Alvar Aalto (1925)

Photo © Paijane 1924/Alvar Aalto
Archives

Erik Bryggman in Turku exemplify these characteristics, especially the Aaltos’s Defense
Corps building (1926) in Jyvaskyla and Southwestern Agricultural Cooperative (1929) in
Turk and Bryggman’s two blocks of flats (mid-1920s) in Turku.

Hilding Ekelund’s “Art Hall” (1929) and T6616 Church (1930), both in Helsinki, and
the Aaltos’s Worker’s Club (1925) in Jyvaskyla represent, in contrast, the free play of
expression found in this form of classicism. These works, while using elements of the
classical language, often exhibit exaggerated, even mannered, qualities in the overall
composition or the detailing.

Many of Helsinki’s suburban developments date from this period and are
composed of apartment blocks executed in this form of classicism to
achieve a harmonious cityscape. The streetscapes along Makelankatu and
Museokatu in Helsinki are examples of this unified intention. Martti
Valikangas’s Kapyla Garden Suburb (1925) in Helsinki combines classical
motifs and decoration with a simple vernacular-inspired building while
demonstrating an understanding of the most up-to-date town-planning
principles.

Finnish Functionalism

Finnish awareness of the new ideas emerging from continental Europe began in the
1920s, as Scandinavian journals began publishing the work of the French, German,
Dutch, and Russian avant-garde. At this time, Finnish architects were especially open to
currents from the outside and willing to participate in theoretical and polemical
discussions. Architects such as Alvar and Aalto and Erik Bryggman, among others,
traveled throughout Europe to visit the seminal works of the new architecture and to
attend meetings of CIAM (Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne). In
particular, Aalto’s firsthand knowledge of avant-garde developments not only was
instrumental in the promulgation of Finnish functionalism but quickly established him as
among its leaders.

Accepting both the formal canons and the social programs of modernism, Finnish
functionalism was characterized by use of the “free” plan; the separation of structure
from building envelope, with the structure (usually of concrete) being detached from the
“free” facade; and a machine imagery created by tautskinned, white cubic volumes with
minimalistic industrial detailing. The architects further accepted the modern bias for
buildings sited in open, park-like settings. In built works as well as in proposals, portions
of extant urban fabric were opened to automobile access and the perceived health-giving
qualities of sun, air, and greenery.

Although a number of Finns directly experienced the major new works on the
Continent—which led to extremely sophisti-cated buildings being executed in this small
country—Aalto’s knowledge of his peers’ work and his quick assimilation of
modernism’s industrial detailing techniques were wryly commented on by Hilding
Ekelund in 1930: “With the same enthusiasm as the academics of the 1880s drew Roman
baroque portals, Gothic pinnacles, etc. in their sketchbooks for use in their architectural
practice, Alvar Aalto noses out new, rational-technical details from all over Europe which
he then makes use of and transforms with considerable skill” (Mikkola 1980, 75).

The Aaltos’s Newspaper Building (1929) in Turku and Tuberculosis Sanatorium
(1933) in Paimio are seminal pieces of Finnish functionalism, as they have fully
incorporated Le Corbusier’s “Five Points of a New Architecture.” However, Aalto was
by no means the lone practitioner, and by the early 1930s, a number of especially fine
examples of modernism existed throughout Finland. Exemplary works, embracing both
modernism’s formal canons and social programs, were also produced by Erik Bryggman,
Viljo Revell, Erkki Huttunen, Oiva Kallio, and P.E.Blomstedt.

P.E.Blomstedt, who worked with his architect wife Marta, completed two small but
excellent works: the Kannonkoski Church (1933) and the Kotka Savings Bank (1935).
After his death in 1935, Marta Blomstedt, with Matti Lampén, completed the Pohjanhovi
Hotel (1936) in Rovaniemi, one of the most important works of the period. The “Glass
Palace” (1935) in Helsinki by Viljo Revell embraces modernism through expression of its
program of restaurants, shops, and a cinema, all part of the central bus station, as well as
for its machine aesthetics. Bryggman’s library tower (1935) for the Abo Akademi in
Turku, the exceptional Helsinki Olympic Stadium (1940) by Yrj6 Lindegren, and a series
of works by Erkki Huttunen—the Cooperative Shop (1933) in Sauvo, the Kotka Town


Hall (1934), and the SOK warehouse and office building (1938) in Oulu—are all
examples of the acceptance of functionalism in Finland.

Although many architects continued to actively embrace functionalism, criticism of its
propositions began to emerge during the mid- to late 1930s. This criticism initially
concerned tectonics and materiality. As modernist works appeared in Finland and the
forces of nature and the effect of climate began to act on them, architects questioned the
advisability of using Mediterranean-inspired building forms in the harsh northern
environment. To modify functionalism’s astringent forms and material palette, Finnish
architects incorporated traditional pitched-roof forms; brick, tile, and stone cladding; and
punched window openings. Traditional norms modified functionalist “ethics,” providing
more corporeal substance and regional character to the work.

In the Aaltos’s work, this change can be seen initially in the evolution of
the design for the Viipuri Library (1935) and their residence (1936) in
Munkkiniemi. However, the Finnish Pavilion at the 1936 Paris World’s
Fair and the Villa Mairea (1939) are the pivotal works that reveal and
codify the directions that Aalto took over the next three decades of his
production (Aino Aalto died of cancer in 1949). Erik Bryggman’s elegant
Resurrection Chapel (1940) in Turku is another example of this movement
toward a more experiential and tactile architecture. In both the Villa
Mairea and the Resurrection Chapel, the interplay between nature and the
architecture is an essential characteristic of the design. A number of
housing complexes and service facilities for factory complexes by Aalto,
Aarne Ervi, and Viljo Revell exploit this play between built form and the
natural setting.

Postwar Developments

At one level, Aalto’s work dominated Finnish developments in the post-World War II
era. The Sdyndtsalo Town Hall (1952), Rautatalo office building (1955), National
Pensions Institute (1956), House of Culture (1958), and Vouksenniska Church (1959) all
reinforced his international standing and independent direction. However, Finland during
the 1950s and 1960s was more than Aalto.

Whereas Aalto went his own way, the majority of Finnish architects continued to
practice an evolved form of modernism influenced by Mies van der Rohe and others.
Their buildings are characterized by their direct approach in the use of reinforced
concrete and steel along with brick and wood, coupled with rational planning and
organizational techniques. Examples include Viljo Revell’s Palace Hotel (1952, with
Keijo Petaja) in Helsinki and Vatiala Cemetery Chapel (1962); the numerous housing
complexes by Arne Ervi; Yrj6 Lindegren’s Serpent house (1951), Kaija and Heikki
Siren’s National Theater addition (1954) and Otaniemi Chapel (1957); and Aarno
Ruusuvuori’s Hyvinkaa Church (1961) and Huutoniemi Church (1964). Less Romantic in
conception than Aalto’s contemporaneous works, these buildings expanded the rationalist


aspect of modernism while incorporating more expressive spatial exploration with a
richer material vocabulary.

Often, this period in Finnish architectural development is viewed as the quiet, golden
age of the century, a result of Aalto’s code of not discussing his architecture, coupled
with the general preference of a material palette relying on brick and wood. However,
this was not necessarily the norm, and in fact much influence should be accorded the
work and theoretical writings of Aulis Blomstedt. Blomstedt aimed to develop an
objective theory of architecture that was verified through practice, with simplicity,
austerity, and abstraction becoming essentials in his designs. His terrace housing complex
(1954) in Tapiola and Worker’s Institute (1959) in Helsinki are essays in his rigorous
process of thinking and doing, as are a series of abstract graphic and installation pieces
that he did to study proportion. In addition to practicing, Blomstedt was a professor at the
Helsinki University of Technology, and his influence is seen in the works of his
students—Kristian Gullichsen, Juhani Pallasmaa, Erkki Kairamo, and Kirmo Mikkola,
among others—executed during the 1970s and 1980s.

New towns were also a feature of Finnish postwar development, especially around
Helsinki. Because of the city’s growth in the 1950s, a series of planned garden suburban
developments was created. The most famous was Tapiola Garden City, begun in 1952,
which embraced the Finn’s particular enthusiasm for living close to nature. The plan for
Tapiola comprised three neighborhoods grouped around a city center and separated by
green zones. The shopping and administrative center (1961) was designed by Aarne Ervi.
The housing complexes were done by the best of Finland’s architects: Aulis Blomstedt
designed flats (1961), terrace houses (1964), and studio housing (1965); Viljo Revell
executed flats (1958) and a complex of tower blocks (1960); Aarno Ruusuvuori designed
the Weilin and Géés print-ing works (1964) and the parish church (1965); and H. and K.
Siren contributed a complex of terrace houses (1959).

By the late 1960s, Finnish architects were either exploring a more expressive
modernist language or working toward a more rationalist, abstract form of expression.
The first can be seen in the Helsinki City Theater (1967) by Tima Penttila; the Taivallahti
Church, or famous “church in the rock” (1969), by Timo and Tuomo Suomalainen; the
Sibelius Museum in Turku (1968) by Woldemar Baeckman; and the Kouvola City Hall
(1969) by Saarnio and Leiviské. The second, influenced by Blomstedt, can be seen in the
more purist architecture of the Villa Relander in Muurame (1966) by Kirmo Mikkola and
Juhani Pallasmaa, the Moduli 225 system of construction (1970) by Kristian Gullichsen
and Pallasmaa, and the Liinasaarentie multifamily housing (1971) and semidetached
housing (1980), both in Espoo, by Erikki Kairamo. Aarno Ruusuvuori’s sauna (1968),
designed for industrial manufacture and commissioned by Marimekko, is a true essay of
architectural purity achieved with the most minimal gestures.

While a duality was established between Aalto and Blomstedt, another
design force emerged in Finland during the late 1950s that appeared to
bridge the two: Reima Pietilé and his architect wife Raili Paatelainen.
Their early work—beginning with the Finnish Pavilion at the 1958
Brussels World’s Fair and including the Kaleva Church (1960) in
Tampere, the “Dipoli” student union (1964) at Otaniemi, and the

Suvikumpu housing (1969) in Tapiola—is both distinctive and

Expressionistic yet rational. Although their work often seems to emerge
from the site, somewhat akin to Aalto’s, there is still a controlled abstract
quality to their architectural conceptions, as Pietilé learned much from
Blomstedt and was influenced by his writings and thinking. After the
critical success of these projects, Pietila had a decade-long hiatus in his
work and did not receive a significant building project in Finland until the
commission for the Hervanta Community Complex in suburban Tampere
in 1975. Although Hervanta was not of the quality of their earlier work,
the Pietila’s last works—the Lieksa Church (1982), the Tampere City
Library (1983), and most especially the Finnish President’s Official
Residence (1993)—regain an intense and expressive architectural power.

The Past Quarter-Century

Contemporary Finnish architects carry forward both the rational and the expressive
threads present in the past half-century of architectural production. The best work
combines both threads into a rich experiential architecture that also builds on a deep
understanding of program and site. Architects such as Ruusuvuori, Pallasmaa,
Gullichsen, and Kairamo are joined by Kapy and Simo Paavilainen; Juha Leiviska; Pekka
Helin and Tuomo Siitonen; Mikko Heikkinen and Markku Komonen; the three-some of
Matti Nurmela, Kari Raimoranta, and Jyrki Tasa; and the group MONARK, among
others, in creating some of the very best work recently done in Finland.

The Olari Church and Parish Center (1981) in Espoo, the new Parish Center (1989) in
Paimio by Kapy and Simo Paavilainen, and the numerous churches by Juha Leiviska—
the Church of St. Thomas (1975) in Oulu, the Myyrmaki Church and Parrish Center
(1984) in Vantaa, the Kirkkonummi Parish Center (1984), and the Mannisté Church
(1992)—are true instruments for manipulating natural light. Leiviska in particular, whose
churches are organized as series of parallel white planes, creates through a combination
of baroque exuberance and Nordic coolness wonderfully engaging settings for light to
play in. In his other works, as exemplified by the German Embassy (1992) in Helsinki
and the art museum (1988) in Kajanni, Leiviské demonstrates his mastery of the use of
the wall as the primary organizing element in his architecture.

Juhani Pallasmaa took a breather from architecture for about a decade. He was director
of the Museum of Finnish Architecture for five years and spent much time writing on the
theory and philosophy of architecture and doing graphic design and artistic projects.
When he returned to architecture, his work, as best witnessed in his Rovaniemi Art
Museum (1986) and Finnish Institute (1991) in Paris, extends his earlier rationalism
toward a more considered, thoughtful experiential expressiveness. Like many of his
colleagues, Pallasmaa designs furniture and art objects and does graphic design: however,
more in keeping with Aalto, these endeavors seem to more directly influence his
architecture.

The work of Arkkitehdit Ky runs a range of expressive techniques, depending on
which of the design principals—Kristian Gullichsen, Erikki Kairamo, or Timo

Vormala—is in charge of the project. Gullichsen’s work, best seen in his Parish Center
(1983) in Kauniainen and Pieksémaki Cultural Center (1989), is a demonstration of the
concept of “building as wall,” which structures the entire site and overall spatial order.
Kairamo’s work is more “Constructivist” in expression, as demonstrated in his
semidetached houses (1990) in Espoo and the much celebrated Itakeskus Tower and
Commercial Center (1987) in Helsinki. Vormala’s architecture is more vernacular and
traditional in expression, yet it is grounded in modernism, as seen in the apartment
complex (1980) in Varisto, Ventaa, and the block of flats (1984) in the Nakinpuisto
section of Helsinki. The firm also produced the highly visible and significant extension to
the Stockmann’s department store (1989) in central Helsinki.

The range and scope of work executed by Pekka Helin and Tuomo Siitonen is
impressive for its conceptual strength as well as detail execution. Their UKK Institute for
the Study of Health and Fitness (1983) in Tampere; the Swimming Hall and
Multipurpose Hall (1986) in Hollola; the UNIC Ltd. headquarters (1991) in Helsinki;
their exquisite Sibelius Quarters housing complex (1993) in Boras, Sweden; and the
North Karelian Provincial Library (1992) in Joensuu, among other works, demonstrate
the diversity of their projects.

A series of very interesting building complexes have been executed by
Matti Nurmela, Kari Raimoranta, and Jyrki Tasa. These include the
Lippajarvi Daycare Center (1983), the Post Office (1984) in Malmi, the
Library (1984) in Kuhmo, and the Commercial Center (1989) in Pori. The
Cultural Center (1989) for Tapiola by Arto Sipinen and the unique Finnish
Pavilion for the 1992 Seville World’s Fair by MONARK are additional
examples of the range of architectural thinking occurring in Finland today.
And then there is the expressive and excellently executed work of Mikko
Heikkinen and Markku Komonen: Their Finnish Science Center
“Heureka” (1988) in Helsinki, the Rovaniemi Airport (1992), and the
Finnish Chancery (1993) in Washington, D.C., all bespeak an elegant

clarity in organization as well as detail quality.

Over the course of the 20th century, Finnish architects have desired to create an
architecture of both place and time. In doing so, they have created a tradition of executing
strong architectural ideas and conceptions and developing them toward a rich and
expressive result. The architecture of 20th-century Finland is not one of overly complex
ideas executed in a simple-minded fashion but, rather, that of substantive concepts that
are worked and elaborated into a palpable, meaningful, and fully experiential
architecture.

WILLIAM C.MILLER

Aalto, Alvar (Finland); Helsinki, Finland; Helsinki Railway Station,
Finland; Paimio Sanatorium, near Turku, Finland; Pietiléa, Reima, and
Raili (Finland); Saarinen, Eero (Finland); Saarinen, Eliel (Finland)

Further Reading

A number of works on modern Finnish architecture exist, as do several general surveys
on the overall architectural history of the country. Most of the works lack true
comprehensiveness, and often the sections on Functionalism and postwar architecture
devote too much discussion to Alvar Aalto at the expense of other significant architects.
Aalto’s work notwithstanding, there is a much more rich and varied body of work
representing those periods. The importance of Aulis Blomstedt to postwar Finnish
developments and the critical reaction many young architects of the 1960s and 1970s had
to the dominance of Aalto (versus how he was viewed internationally) do not often
receive the attention they should. A comprehensive and detailed assessment of 20th-
century Finnish architecture is still needed. The Museum of Finnish Architecture
continues to be an excellent source for exhibitions and publications on both historical and
contemporary developments in the architecture of Finland.
Helander, Vilhelm, and Simo Rista, (bilingual Finnish-English edition), Helsinki:
Kirjayhtyma, 1987
Mikkola, Kirmo, “Finland: Pa spaning efter en nutid” [“Finland: Looking for the Present
Times”. In edited by Gunilla Lundahl, Stockholm: Arkitektur Férlag, 1980
Nerdinger, Winfried (editor), Munich and London: Prestel, 1999
Nikula, Riitta, and Kristiina Paatero (editors), (bilingual Finnish-English
edition), Helsinki: Museum of Finnish Architecture, 1994
Poole, Scott, New York: Rizzoli, 1992
Quantrill, Malcolm, New York and London: Spon, 1995
Richards, J.M., North Pomfret, Vermont, and Newton Abbot, Devon: David and
Charles, 1978
Salokorpi, Asko, New York: Praeger, 1970

Suhonen, Pekka, Helsinki: Tammi, 1967
Suomen Rakennustaiteen Museo, Helsinki: Museum of Finnish Architecture, 1983

Tempel, Egon, New York: Praeger, 1968

Wickberg, Nils Erik, | Stockholm: Lindqvist, 1959; as Helsinki: Otava, 1959

FISKER, KAY 1893-1965

Architect, Denmark

Kay Fisker was one of the early proponents of functionalism in Danish architecture.
Taking his point of departure from the early 20th-century Danish Neoclassicism so
prevalent in the 1910s and 1920s, he developed a type of functional building design
specific to the Danish language of materials. In this way, Fisker took his inspiration first
from functional theorist and practitioner Louis Sullivan and only later from his
contemporaries among the European architects, such as Mies van der Rohe, Walter
Gropius, and Le Corbusier. Fisker’s successful bridging of these two styles in his practice

(with partner C.F.Moller from 1930 to 1941), along with his steadfast promotion of
functionalist ideals in his teaching at the Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen and
abroad and as a writer for architectural publications (including the Danish journal ),
proves his place as one of the most influential figures in modern architecture in Denmark
is justified.

Fisker first melded regional expression with functionalist principles in a student
project, with Aage Rafn, for a small railroad station (1915) on the island of Bornholm. A
study in form, the end-gabled station, with little architectural detail other than patterning
of the brick exterior, set the stage for Fisker’s drawing on traditional Danish building
types for his simplified structures. Fisker was able to expand on his application of
functionalist principles to large-scale architecture beginning in the 1920s, specifically, on
new forms of housing called for after the world wars. It is for his work in this area that
Fisker is best known today.

The housing shortage in Denmark, particularly in Copenhagen, after World War I led
to substantial government funds allotted to large-scale housing projects. Fisker’s early
housing block Hornbzekhus (1922) helped define a new type of structure meeting the
needs of modern Danes. The architect conceived of this rectangular apartment block,
which enclosed a large central garden, as a series of identical apartment modules, both
modern ideas at the time. This early solution, however, expressed functionalism through
the lingering vocabulary of Neoclassicism. The symmetrical brick exterior is broken only
by marching rows of uniform windows running across the entire facade of the building.
Fisker’s early publication with F.R.Yerbury, (1927), championed the neoclassical as
the most appropriate style of the day. It is this sense of regularity, of preoccupation with
massing and form, that remained the hallmark of Fisker’s architecture even after he
abandoned the neoclassical style in the 1930s.

The introduction of international functionalism, introduced through exhibitions in
Berlin and Stockholm in 1930, provided Denmark with a break from Neoclassicism. This
new practical vocabulary had a decisive effect on the direction of Fisker’s later apartment
houses and other structures. After some experimentation, Fisker applied a more attractive
and humanistic solution to the blocks of flats while still retaining their regional qualities.
His Vestersohus housing project (1935, 1938) features brick facades broken up with
rectangular projecting balconies paired with windows, giving the structure a pleasing
proportion and appearance. This was no mean task with such an inherently long and
monotonous building type, although by this time the enclosed street block, seen in
Hornbzekhus, had been abandoned. Fisker, in his 1948 article “The History of Domestic
Architecture in Denmark,” described this new functional aspect of balconies as helping to
“accentuate facades in the rhythm of the new architectural style, facades which...were to
give honest expression to the plan behind them” (Fisker, 1948). This break from
classicism also led to siting becoming a more important aspect of Danish modern
architecture, especially on the newly developed outskirts of Copenhagen. Vestersohus, by
example, is picturesquely placed with its main facade facing a Copenhagen lake. In
addition, the state’s involvement with these residential estates meant that it exercised
aesthetic control, employing the same architects for later additions to ensure visual unity.

In the period following World War II, Fisker made significant contributions to the new
trend of terraced apartment houses of smaller separate units set about in a parklike area.
The grouping of several smaller housing blocks together throughout such massive estates

became a typical way of breaking up the monotony of large-scale residential projects
while providing more light and a neighborhood feel. Buildings in these complex
developments related to the natural site and to one another in a way that the long housing
blocks could not. Fisker’s Voldparken estate (Husum, 1949-51) is a celebrated example
of this type of housing block evolution in which the previously mentioned solutions are
applied. Fisker again concentrated on overall form and massing, keeping in mind native
qualities. Each house, for example, is constructed of warm indigenous brick with a hip
roof. The long facades are again relieved through Fisker’s use of balconies that
ingeniously project from the building at an angle. Fisker also designed a school (1951-
57) at Voldparken.

Many of the qualities of Fisker’s large-scale housing projects were appropriate for his
most well known project. In 1931, Fisker, along with partner C.F.Maller and Povl
Stegmann, won the competition for the new Arhus University campus (1932-68) in
Arhus, Denmark. It was only the country’s second university, and the state broke with the
classical, formal situation of an urban campus in favor of a modern one. The setting was
undeveloped land marked by rolling hills, existing groves of trees, and glacial streams
that were dammed to create two small lakes. The university buildings were to be
informally nestled into this park setting while respecting the natural terrain. The
architects strove for uniformity in the architectural vocabulary of the structures, and this
program was adhered to in later additions (Stegmann left the project in 1937 and Fisker
in 1945, after which C.F.Maller was the sole architect). Fisker’s university buildings
again recall traditional Danish structures, with their cubist forms, pitched roofs of yellow
tiles, and unbroken yellow-brick exteriors, but on a much larger scale. Therefore, the
buildings, beginning with the strong, unornamented Institute for Chemistry, Physics, and
Anatomy (1932-33), although clearly expressing the new functionalism, still project the
monumental qualities typical of Fisker’s work.

The transition between Neoclassicism and Danish functionalism in Fisker’s
architecture can also be traced in his silver designs for A.Michelsen in the 1920s, whereas
his domestic and ship interiors display a more modern progressivism. This influence can
be seen in the work of his students, such as Jorn Utzon, who went on to international
fame.

JENNIFER KOMAR OLIVAREZ
Copenhagen, Denmark; Denmark; Utzon, Jorn (Denmark)

Biography

Born in Copenhagen, Denmark, 14 February 1893. Attended Gustav Vermehren’s School
of Architecture, Copenhagen 1909; studied at the Academy of Fine Arts, School of
Architecture, Copenhagen 1909-20; studied English housing legislation, London 1919;
traveled and studied, Italy, France, India, China, Japan 1920-22. Editor, 1919; assistant
to Edvard Thomsen, Academy of Fine Arts, Copenhagen 1919-20. Private practice,
Copenhagen from 1920; partner with C.F.Meller, Copenhagen 1930-41. Visiting
lecturer, Technical School, Helsinki 1928; professor of architecture, Academy of Fine
Arts, Copenhagen from 1936; dean, Architectural School, Academy of Fine Arts,
Copenhagen from 1941; visiting professor, Graduate School of Design, Harvard

University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1952; visiting professor, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge 1952 and 1957; visiting lecturer, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana 1952; visiting lecturer, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta 1952;
visiting lecturer, Royal Technical School, Stockholm 1954. Member, Royal Academy for
the Liberal Arts, Stockholm 1936; chairman, Academic Architects Society, Copenhagen
1940; member of the council, State Building Research Institute, Copenhagen 1946;
honorary corresponding member, Royal Institute of British Architects 1946; member,
Society for Architectural History 1947; member, Royal Society of Arts 1948;
extraordinary member, Heinrich Tessenow Gesellschaft 1948; member, Danish
Architects National Association 1952; honorary member, Architectural League of New
York 1952; honorary fellow, American Institute of Architects 1955; vice president,
academic council, Copenhagen 1959; extraordinary member, Society of Architectural
Historians, Philadelphia 1960; extraordinary member, Akademie der Kiinste 1960. Died
in Copenhagen, 21 June 1965.

Selected Works

Hornbzekhaus Cooperative Society Housing, Borups Allé and Stefansgade, Copenhagen,
1922

Vestersohus I Housing, Vester Segade, Copenhagen, 1935

Vestersohus II Housing, Vester Segade, Copenhagen, 1938

University (first prize, 1931 competition; with Povl Stegmann until 1937; with
C.F.Maller until 1945), Aarhus, 1945

Voldparken Housing, Husum, Denmark, 1951

National Council for Unmarried Mothers Administration Building and Home,
Copenhagen, 1955

Voldparken School, Husum, Denmark, 1957

Interbau Housing, West Berlin, 1957

Selected Publications

(with F.R.Yerbury), 1927
(with others), 1936
(with Knud Millech), 1951
(coeditor with Christian filling), 1961

Further Reading

These selections represent most of the writings on Kay Fisker in English, with the
addition of the most recent Danish biography by Tobias Faber (1995). Surveys of Danish
architecture by Tobias Faber (1963, 1968) and Esbjern Hiort (1954, 1959) are the most
helpful English sources on Fisker’s work.

Anderson, Stanford, “The ‘New Empiricism—Bay Region Axis’: Kay Fisker and
Postwar Debates on Functionalism, Regionalism, and Monumentality” (translation of
essay in Faber 1995), 50/3 (February 1997)

Faber, Tobias, Denmark: Det Danske Selskab, 1963
Faber, Tobias, _ translated by E.Rockwell, New York, Praeger, 1968
Faber, Tobias (editor), (in Danish), Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag, 1995
Fisker, Kay, “The History of Domestic Architecture in Denmark,” —_104/623 (November
1948)

Fisker, Kay, “The Moral of Functionalism,” 43 (February 1950)

Hiort, Esbjarn, | Copenhagen: Gjellerups, 1949; as _ translated by Eve M. Wendt,
Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag, 1958
Hiort, Esbjern, | Copenhagen: Gjellerups, and New York: Museum Books, 1954
Langkilde, Hans Erling, (with English summary), Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag,
1960
“M/S Kronprins Frederik/Kay Fisker: Architect,” 101/602 (February 1947)

FLATIRON BUILDING

Designed by D.H. Burnham and Company; completed 1903

New York, New York

With its striking shape, prominent location, and exceptional height, the Flatiron
Building was one of New York’s most discussed and distinctive skyscrapers at the
beginning of the 20th century. It was originally named the Fuller Building after the
George A.Fuller Company, which had served as the building’s developer and builder and
was one of its original occupants until moving to a new building in 1929. From its lofty
quarters, the New York office of the Fuller Company oversaw as general contractors the
construction of several of the city’s most prominent buildings. However, few called this
skyscraper the Fuller Building; the triangular lot from which this tower rises quickly led
to the building’s popular moniker, the Flatiron.

The architect of the building was D.H.Burnham and Company of Chicago. Daniel
H.Burnham (1846-1912) had established himself as one of America’s most prominent
architects and planners. By the time the Flatiron was being designed and built (1901-03),
Burnham was devoting much of his time to big plans. Among other things, he played an
important role in the development of the Senate Park Commission Plan (1901-02) for
Washington, D.C. Concurrently, his large architectural office was designing numerous
buildings across the country. Burnham oversaw the operation but left much of the
creative work to several talented designers in the firm, including Frederick P.Dinkelberg,
who appears to have had an important hand in the architectural design of the Flatiron.

At 21 stories or 307 feet tall, the Flatiron Building was one of the taller skyscrapers in
New York when it was built. The building’s structural steel frame, with extensive wind
bracing, reflected the recent acceptance of the all-steel skeleton for skyscrapers in New
York, after the pioneering efforts of the Chicago School (in which Burnham and his
former partner John W. Root had played a key role). The limestone and terra cotta that


cover the building are of the same light monochrome. The rustication and heavily
ornamented patterns of these walls, as well as the conservatively sized windows, give the
facades a heavy appearance, even though these are not load-bearing walls. The multistory
oriels in the midsection, which are prominent in many of Burnham’s Chicago buildings,
are just barely perceptible on the busy, more enclosed skin of the Flatiron. This greater
visual weight becomes especially evident in comparison with Burnham’s earlier and even
his contemporary work in Chicago. It is as if this Midwest-bred approach to skyscraper
design became more formal when it came east to New York.

Stylistically, the design of the Flatiron draws from the classical tradition, with French
Renaissance motifs. Ever since Burnham played a pivotal role in the staging of the 1893
World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago, he became increasingly enamored with
Beaux-Arts classicism, an attraction that found its broadest expression in his involvement
in the City Beautiful movement. The Flatiron is a vertical extension of a Renaissance
palazzo: the tripartition of the overall design into a distinct base, a repetitive midsection,
and a crowning cornice is now extended over 20 stories, making the whole appear
column-like. If the Flatiron had been a building of a more traditional height, it could have
fit comfortably in a contemporary City Beautiful plan with radial avenues carving
triangular lots in a Parisian manner. But the Flatiron is not of a traditional scale. Its
enormous height stretches its classical garb uneasily. It is not a part of a larger
choreographed urban ensemble; in fact, it stands isolated as a freestanding tower on its
own small urban island bound by 22nd Street, Broadway, and Fifth Avenue. The diagonal
slice that Broadway makes through Manhattan’s grid as it skirts past Madison Square
creates the site’s right triangle. The long, thin triangular footprint of the Flatiron extrudes
up through all its stories. With all three fagades facing streets, this tall, thin building was
designed to always have very well-lit office spaces.

The most acute angle of the Flatiron points north. Early 20th-century commentators
often likened this sharply curved corner of the building to a ship’s prow. When seen at an
angle from Madison Square, the building can appear to have little depth, like a wall
leaned precariously against the sky. The gravity-defying illusion of the building is further
enhanced by the enormous cornice projecting aggressively from the top of the building,
giving the whole affair a top-heavy appearance. Although the building is in the flat-
topped tradition of the Chicago School, its arrow-like north angle can make the Flatiron
appear as if its horizontal cornice is pointing skyward in photographs. The striking visual
presence of this uncommon vertical mass is what made the building instantly famous
both with tourists and those in the arts grappling with the nature of New York’s
modernity. Did D.H. Burnham and Company intend all of this drama in the Flatiron?
Perhaps not; the elements of the design fit in comfortably with the general development
of the firm. It was the unconventional triangular lot, coupled with exceptional height, that
transformed architectural conventions into something unique.

In the first years after completion, the Flatiron Building received

considerable attention from various sources. In 1903 the


D.H.Burnham and Company, Flatiron
Building, 1900-03, New York

© Craig Zabel

reported that strong, swirling winds were congregating at the building’s base and
playing havoc with pedestrians. One writer for in 1905 contemplated the ironies of
contemporary civilization in New York from a godlike vantage point high up in the
Flatiron. A 1903 essay in discussed whether the Flatiron would lead to a rethinking of
aesthetics. Photographers responded most profoundly to the visual challenge of the
Flatiron. Photographs by Alfred Stieglitz and Edward Steichen taken soon after the
building’s completion established the Flatiron’s iconic presence upon the modern
imagination. However, these early photographs typically veil the Flatiron in the
atmospheric effects of nature; the building’s stylistic pretensions erode as the sublime
vertical mass becomes dominant.

In 1903 the Flatiron stood in relative isolation near Madison Square, since the city’s
other early skyscrapers were clustered further south on Manhattan. However, ever-taller
skyscrapers soon dwarfed the Flatiron: the 700-foot Metropolitan Life Tower (1909)
arose on the other side of Madison Square, and the Empire State Building (1931) was
built several blocks to the north on Fifth Avenue. From the tops of both of these buildings

one had new yet belittling views of the Flatiron. Today, the Flatiron is one of New York’s
oldest extant skyscrapers and re tains its theatrical and unsettling presence amid the ever-
growing concentration of Manhattan’s skyscrapers.
CRAIG ZABEL
Burnham, Daniel H. (United States); Chicago School; City Beautiful

Movement; Empire State Building, New York; Skyscraper

Further Reading

For further detailed discussion of the Flatiron Building, see especially Landau and
Condit, and Zukowsky and Saliga. Hines develops the context of the architect, while
Starrett develops the context of the builder. Kreitler and Schleier examine the artistic
response to the Flat-iron.
Allan, Sidney (Sadakichi Hartmann), “The ‘Flat-Iron’ Building—An Esthetical
Dissertation,” 4 (1903)
“The ‘Flatiron’ or Fuller Building,” 12, no. 5 (1902)
Goldberger, Paul, New York: Knopf, 1981

Hines, Thomas S., “No Little Plans: The Achievement of Daniel Burnham,” 13, no.
2 (1988)
Kreitler, Peter Gwillim, Washington, D.C.: American Institute of Architects
Press, 1990

Landau, Sarah Bradford, and Carl W.Condit, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
University Press, 1996
Nash, Eric P.. | New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999
Saltus, Edgar, “New York from the Flatiron,” 33, no. 4 (1905)

Schleier, Merrill, 2 vols., Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press, 1986
Starrett, Paul, New York and London: Whittlesey House, 1938
“Whirling Winds Play Havoc with Women at Flatiron,” (31 January 1903)
Zukowsky, John, and Pauline Saliga, “Late Works by Burnham and Sullivan,” 11,
no. 1 (1984)

FOSTER, NORMAN 1935-

Architect, England

Together with architects Richard Rogers, Nicholas Grimshaw, and Michael Hopkins,
Norman Foster is credited with pioneering the design style known as High-Tech in
Britain in the early 1970s. Although in the United States the term refers principally to an
architectural style, in Britain High-Tech points to a more rigorous approach in which
advanced technology is acknowledged as representing the “spirit of the age.” The
aesthetics of industrial production and machine technology are celebrated and embodied

in the methodology of design production. Industry is a source for both technology and
imagery.

After working in the city treasurer’s office in Manchester Town Hall and
serving for two years in the Royal Air Force, Foster studied at the
University of Manchester (1956-61) and at Yale University (1961-62). In
1963, he formed Team 4 in London, collaborating with his wife, Wendy,
and Su and Rich-

Great Court at The British Museum
(extension), London, 1994-2000

Photo by Nigel Young © Foster and
Partners

ard Rogers, whom he had met at Yale. An early commission was for a house in Cornwall
for Richard Rogers’s parents-in-law, the Brumwells, and their art collection. Marcus
Brumwell had been a founder of Misha Black’s design consultancy, DRU, and this
connection was to lead to further commissions. The house is half buried in the contours
of the site and takes full advantage of the dramatic coastal position; the bridge spanning
the steep gully between road and turfed roof presages some of Foster and Roger’s later

preoccupations. Another significant early work was the controversial Reliance Controls
Factory (1967) at Swindon. Here, Foster’s interest in tense metal skins for buildings and
Roger’s predilection for expressing structural bracing externally are anticipated. There
was also a concern for civilizing working conditions, which was to become a hallmark of
Foster’s commercial buildings.

Foster Associates was founded in London in 1967 and includes eight partners in
addition to Norman and Wendy Foster (Loren Butt, Chubby 8.Chhabra, Spencer de Gray,
Roy Fleetwood, Birkin Haward, James Meller, Graham Phillips, and Mark Robertson). It
has become an immensely successful practice with an international profile. Their first
significant commission was the Olsen line passenger terminal and administration building
(1971) in London’s Dockland. Here, Foster declared his concern of breaking down the
“distinction between us and them, posh and scruffy, front office and workers’ entrance.”
Throughout the early 1970s, Foster brought his commitment to a patrician elegance to a
whole range of modestly scaled buildings, offices, schools, shops, and some factories.

The celebrated headquarters of the Willis Faber Dumas offices (1975) in Ipswich
boasts a curved glass facade that reinforces the street boundaries and harmonizes with the
urban environment. Two floors of office accommodation for 1300 people are elevated
and placed between amenity and support areas above and below, including a swimming
pool and gymnasium on the ground floor and a restaurant pavilion set in the landscaped
garden roof. The Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts (1978), built to house the Sir
Robert and Lady Sainsbury Collection, comprises an ingeniously adaptable structure that
allows any part of the external walls and roof to be changed quickly to provide different
combinations of glazed, solid, or grilled aluminum panels. A single, large, span roof
covers two exhibition galleries, the School of Fine Arts, a large reception area, the
university faculty club, a public restaurant, and storage facilities. The latter requiring
more space, Foster designed the fan-shaped Crescent Wing, completed in 1991. This
addition is introduced discretely into the landscape and does not destroy the integrity of
the main building. The Renault Distribution Centre (1983) at Swindon is based on a
structural module—a masted, lightweight suspended roof that repeats itself. Stansted
Airport Terminal (1991) followed, with its dramatic roof structure surmounting the vast
open space of the main building. Such great “neutral space envelopes,” capable of
accommodating differentiated functions, are a feature of Foster’s work. While being
committed to the HighTech movement, which celebrates the aesthetic of industrial
production, Foster is also concerned with what he describes as design “development,”
evinced in the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Headquarters (1985),
described as the most expensive office building ever constructed. Here, all the main
elements of the building, often prefabricated off-site, result from the close collaboration
of architect and manufacturers, ensuring high levels of craftsmanship and quality of
detail. Stansted witnesses a similar concern for detail, with the architect designing
carpets, seating, checkout desks, and retail outlets. More recent works include a
contribution to Stockley Park (1984), Heathrow, Middlesex, a business park attracting
international companies; the ITN Headquarters (1991); Riverside Offices and Apartments
(1990), including Foster’s own apartment, both in London; and the Library (1992) at
Cranfield Institute of Technology, Bedfordshire, England.

HILARY J.GRAINGER

Airport and Aviation Building; Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, Shanghai;
Renault Distribution Center, Swindon, England; Rogers, Richard
(England); Sainsbury Wing, National Gallery, London

Biography

Born in Manchester, England, 1 June 1935. Attended the University of Manchester
School of Architecture and Department of Town and Country Planning 1956-61; studied,
Yale University

Great Court at The British Museum
(extension), London, 1994-2000

© Foster and Partners. Photo by Nigel
Young

School of Architecture 1961-62; master’s degree in architecture 1962. Married 1)
architect Wendy Cheeseman 1964 (died 1989): 4 children; married 2) Begum Sabiha
Rumani Malik 1991. Served in the Royal Air Force 1953-55. Partner, with Wendy Foster
and Richard Rogers, Team 4, London 1963-67; partner, with Wendy Foster, Foster
Associates, London from 1967; now Sir Norman Foster and Partners. Member, Board of
Education and Visiting Examiner, Royal Institute of British Architects 1971-73; vice
president, Architectural Association, London 1974; council member, Royal College of
Art, London from 1981; member, Royal Institute of British Architects; member, Royal
Academy of Arts; member, Ordre des Architetes Francais; member, International
Academy of Architects, Sofia; associate, Académie Royal de Belgique; honorary fellow,
American Institute of Architects; fellow, Society of Industrial Architects and Chartered

Society of Designers; honorary member, Bund Deutscher Architekten. Royal Gold
Medal, Royal Institute of British Architects 1983; knighted 1980.

Selected Works

Reliance Controls Factory, Swindon, Wiltshire, 1967 Fred Olsen Passenger Terminal
and Operations Centre, Millwall, London, 1971

Willis Faber Dumas Country Head Office, Ipswich, Suffolk, 1975

Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts, University of East Anglia, Norwich, 1978

Norman and Wendy Foster House, Cannon Place, Hampstead, London, 1979

Renault Distribution Centre, Swindon, Wiltshire, 1983

Stockley Park, Heathrow, Middlesex, 1984

Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Headquarters, Hong Kong, 1985

Riverside Offices and Apartments, London, 1990

ITN New Headquarters, London, 1991

Stansted Airport Terminal, Essex, England 1991

Crescent Wing (addition), Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts, University of East
Anglia, Norwich, 1991

Cranfield Institute of Technology Library (First prize, 1989 competition),
Bedfordshire, 1992

Commerzbank Headquarters, Frankfurt, Germany, 1997

Hong Kong International Airport, Chek Lap Kok, 1998

Chek Lap Kok, Hong Kong China, 1998

Great Court at the British Museum, London, England, 2000

Selected Publications

Foster, Norman, “Exploring the Client’s Range of Options,” (June 1970)
Foster, Norman, “Recent Work,” (November 1972)
Foster Associates, 47/9-10 (1977)

Further Reading

In the catalog that accompanied the Royal Academy of Arts Exhibition in London in
1986, Sudjic provides one of the most useful contextualizations of Foster’s work. The
catalog also includes a list of works and biographical details to date.
Banham, Reyner, London: RIBA, 1979
Manchester: Whitworth Art Gallery, 1984
“Recent Works of Foster Associates,” (February 1981)
Sudjic, Deyan, London: Royal Academy of Arts, 1986

FRAMPTON, KENNETH 1930-

Architect, historian and critic, United States

Kenneth Frampton is an architect, historian, and theorist based in New York. As an
architect with Douglas Stephen and Partners from 1961 to 1966, when he designed an
eight-story (48-unit) apartment block, Craven Hill Gardens (1964), in Bayswater,
London. It received a Ministry of Housing award and is now a Grade Four historic
monument.

In 1962, Frampton also became a technical editor for | and improved the depth and
quality of the magazine’s coverage of new work, such as the Smithsons’ Economist
Building in London. In 1965, he accepted a teaching position at Princeton University
through the efforts of Peter Eisenman, then a young professor there who had studied at
Cambridge University with Colin Rowe. While at Princeton, he became a member of the
Institute for Architecture and Advanced Studies (IAUS) in New York and eventually one
of the editors of its influential historical and theoretical journal, (1972—82). While a
professor at Columbia University (1972-73), with Theodore Liebman and others, he was
involved in the design of an innovative low-rise, high-density, low-income housing
project, Marcus Garvey Village, in Brownsville, Brooklyn, for the New York State Urban
Development Corporation.

Frampton is perhaps best known for the concept of “critical regionalism,” which he
first advanced in two articles in 1983. Influenced by the writings of the philosopher
Martin Heidegger, Frampton argued that local building culture and climactic influences

could provide a form of resistance to
environmentally destructive forces of wor

what he saw as the homogenizing and
dwide capitalist development. A vehement

critic of the ironic manipulation of formal imagery characteristic of Postmodernism, since

the 1980s he has asserted the importance of
in his (1995). In addition to his position

the tectonics of building, a position reflected
at Columbia, he has taught in recent years at

the University of Virginia, the Berlage Institute in Amsterdam, the ETH (Swiss Federal

Institute of Technology) in Zurich, the EPF-

L (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology) in

Lausanne, and the Accademia di architettura in Mendrisio, Switzerland.

Frampton’s international advocacy for an environmentally and culturally appropriate
modern architecture has gained him considerable respect around the world, although in
the 1990s some have charged him with being too naively idealistic about the role of
architecture in contemporary society in light of the immense changes being wrought by
computing and the spread of a global consumer economy. His response is that our mode
of building has an important role to play in addressing issues of sustainability and global
warming, and he continues to insist that the “architectural profession has an ethical
responsibility for projecting works which have a critically creative character.”

ERIC MUMFORD
Eisenman, Peter (United States}; Museum of Modern Art, New York

City; Postmodernism

Biography

Born in Woking, England, 1930; attended the Architectural Association in London,
architectural degree, 1957. Worked as architect for Karmi, Melzer, Karmi and
Yashar/Eytan in Israel, 1958-59; returned to London (1960) to work for Douglas Stephen
and Partners, 1961-66; received Ministry of Housing award for Craven Hill Gardens
(1964). Became a technical editor for (1962); began teaching at Princeton University
(1965); while there became a member of the Institute for Architecture and Advanced
Studies (IAUS), New York, and eventually one of the editors of its journal, (1972-82).
Professor at the Columbia University School of Architecture (1972-73); taught at the
Royal College of Art in London (1974-77); then returned to Columbia where he is today
the Ware Professor of Architecture. Chairman of the Columbia Division of Architecture
(1986-89), director of Columbia Ph.D. program (1993—). Recipient of numerous awards
and honorary degrees, including American Institute of Architects’ National Honors
Award (1985), ACSA Topaz Medallion (1990), and has served on many design juries,
including the Aga Khan Awards (1999).

Selected Publications

“Maison de Verre,” 81 (April 1966)
“America 1960-1970: Notes on Urban Images and Theory,” 35 (December 1971)
“Twin Parks As Typology,” 138 (June 1973)
“On Reading Heidegger,” 4 (1975)
“Two or Three Things I Know about Them: A Note on Manhattanism,” 47, no. 5
(1977)
New York: Oxford University Press, 1980; 3rd edition, London: Thames and
Hudson, 1992
(with Sylvia Kolbowski), New York: Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies,
Rizzoli International, 1981
London: Architectural Design, 1982
“Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture of Resistance,” in Hal
Foster (editor), Port Townsend, Washington: Bay Press, 1983
“Prospects for a Critical Regionalism,” 20 (1983)
“Homage to Iberia: An Assessment,” in edited by Pauline Saliga and Martha
Thome, 1992
“An Anthropology of Building,” in edited by Ben Farmer and Hentie Louw,
London and New York: Routledge, 1993
“Modernization and Mediation: Frank Lloyd Wright and the Impact of Technology,” in
edited by Terence Riley, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1994
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1995
“Typology, Cosmology, and Construction Methods,” in Frampton, Kenneth, Kudo,
Kunio, Vincent, Keith (editors) New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1997
Frampton, Kenneth, Spector, Arthur, Reed, Lynne (editors), (editors) New York:
Rizzoli, 1998

“The Legacy of Alvar Aalto: Evolution and Influence,” in edited by Peter Reed,
New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998
“The Mutual Limits of Architecture and Science,” in _ edited by Peter Galison and
Emily Thompson, Cambridge Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1999
“Seven Points for the Millenium: An Untimely Manifesto,” 206 (November 1999)
Frampton, Kenneth (editor), Wein: Springer, 1999

Further Reading

Jameson, Frederic, New York: Columbia University Press, 1994
Koolhaas, Rem, “Doubletake: Review Reviewed,” 73 (September/October 1998)
Powell, Kenneth, “Pragmatic Idealist,” (7 March 1996)
Scott-Brown, Denise, “Reply to Frampton,” 35, nos. 359-360 (December 1971)

FRANK, JOSEF 1885-1967

Architect, Austria

Josef Frank was among the leading Austrian representatives of the Modern movement.
He was a founding member of the Congrés Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne
(CIAM), and, as vice president of the Austrian Werkbund, he oversaw the planning and
construction of the 1932 Vienna Werkbundsiedlung. In the early 1930s, however, Frank
emerged as one of the most important and vocal critics of what he saw as the totalitarian
orthodoxy within the various strands of modernism. For the remainder of his life, until he
stopped practicing in the early 1960s, he sought alternatives to what he perceived as the
banality and uniformity of much of the building of his time.

Frank studied architecture with Carl Kénig, Max Fabiani, and others at the Vienna
Technische Hochschule, graduating in 1910 with a dissertation on the churches of Leon
Battista Alberti. While still a student, he flirted briefly with the Art Nouveau (Jugendstil),
but he soon abandoned the style in favor of the renewed historical eclecticism that
dominated much of Central European design in the period after 1905. Around 1909 Frank
formed a partnership with two of his former classmates from the Technische Hochschule,
Oskar Strnad and Oskar Wlach. Together, the three young architects specialized in
houses and interiors for the city’s In the period just prior to 1914, Frank realized
several houses, mostly notably the Scholl House (1913-14), which, despite its lingering
neoclassicism, showed marked parallels with Adolf Loos’s stark pre war villas. Frank,
however, was much more radical in the composition of his facades and furnishings,
which often relied on complex and asymmetrical arrangements.

After World War I, Frank devoted himself to finding solutions to Vienna’s severe
housing shortage. In the early 1920s he designed a series of housing projects in and
around Vienna that were based on the ideas of reduction and repetition. Frank’s early
postwar works continued to draw on historical precedents, but by 1921 he began to
develop a simplified form language, one that reflected the growing development of


(objective) architecture throughout Central Europe. This was especially evident in
Frank’s designs for several apartment buildings for the Vienna municipality, including
the Wiedenhofer-Hof (1924—25) and the Winarsky-Hof (1924-26). The housing blocks,
which were published in many of the leading international architectural journals of the
time, brought Frank increasing notoriety and led to an invitation from Ludwig Mies van
der Rohe to participate in the 1927 Weissenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart.

Frank’s contribution to the Weissenhof exhibition, a double house, was widely lauded
for its straightforward appearance and innovative constructional ideas. Frank’s colorful
and florid interiors, however, which included furnishings and textiles from his shop Haus
and Garten (House and Garden; founded in 1925 with Wlach), drew strong criticism from
many of the other participants and observers who condemned them for being
“conservative,” “feminine,” “obtrusive,” and “middle class.” Frank responded to the
charges in an article titled “Der Gschnas fiirs G’mut und der Gschnas als Problem”
(“Frippery for the Soul and Frippery as a Problem”), in which he argued that the stripped-
down, functionalist style of the radical modernists simply did not respond to most
people’s psychological needs. He repeated these criticisms in his book (1931;
[Architecture as Symbol: Elements of German Modern Architecture]). Many of Frank’s
subsequent designs similarly constituted immanent responses to the modernist vanguard.

Because of the poor state of the Austrian economy in the postwar period, Frank was
able to realize only a handful of residences for private clients, the most import of which
was the Villa Beer (1928-30) in Vienna. Like Loos’s famed (space plan) houses of the
1920s and early 1930s, the three-and-a half-story residence consisted of intricate
arrangement of inter-locking volumes on different levels, and it stands, along with Loos’s
Miiller House and Mies’ Tugendhat House, as one of the most significant modernist
explorations of the possibilities of a new spatial ordering.

In 1933, in response to the Nazi seizure of power in Germany and the growth of anti-
Semitism in Austria, Frank immigrated to Sweden and settled in Stockholm, where he
became the chief designer for the interior design firm Svenskt Tenn. He continued to
produce designs for houses into the early 1960s, but increasingly after 1937 he devoted
himself to furniture design, churning out hundreds of ideas for chairs, tables, and cabinets
as well as textiles, rugs, and other objects for the home. The softened, cozy eclecticism
that Frank developed in his designs for Svenskt Tenn was widely admired and imitated
throughout Scandinavia and contributed to the rise of what later became known as
Swedish or Scandinavian modern design.

From 1941 to 1946, Frank lived in New York City, but he was unable to establish
himself in the United States, and he returned to Sweden and resumed his work for
Svenskt Tenn. Frank continued to reflect on the problems of modern architecture,
however, and in the late 1940s and early 1950s he produced a series of designs for houses
based on the principles of nonorthogonal geometry and chance ordering. He spelled out
these ideas in a manifesto titled “Accidentism,” which was published in the Swedish
design review in 1958. By that time, Frank was largely a forgotten figure, and his bold
proposals attracted little attention. Many of his ideas for an architecture of complexity
and contradiction, however, presaged the rise of Postmodernism in the 1960s.

CHRISTOPHER LONG

Congrés Internationaux d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM, 1927-); Loos,
Adolf (Austria); Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (Germany); Tugendhat

House, Brno, Czech Republic; Weissenhofsiedlung, Deutscher Werkbund
(Stuttgart, 1927)

Biography

Born in Baden, Austria, 15 July 1885. Studied architecture, Technische Hochschule,
Vienna 1903-10. Worked with Bruno Méhring for a year in Berlin 1908-09. Private
practice, Vienna from 1910; founder, Haus and Garten, Vienna 1925; supervisor,
Osterreichischer Werkbund Exhibition, Vienna 1929. Settled in Sweden 1933; worked as
interior designer, Svenskt Tenn. Professor, the Kunstgewebeschule, Vienna 1919-25;
professor, New School for Social Research, New York 1942-43. Contributor,
Weissenhofsiedlung, Stuttgart 1927; representative, CIAM 1928; member, Deutscher
Werkbund; member, vice president, Osterreichischer Werkbund. Died in Stockholm,
Sweden, 8 January 1967.

Selected Works

Scholl House, Vienna, 1914
Wiedenhofer-Hof (apartment building), Vienna, 1925
Winarsky-Hof (apartment building), Vienna, 1926
Villa Beer, Vienna, 1930
Bunzl House, Ortmann, Austria, 1914
Nursery School (Kinderheim), Ortmann, Austria, 1921
Hoffingergasse Housing Project, Vienna, 1925
Claéson House, Falsterbo, Sweden, 1927
House, Weissenhofsiedlung, Stuttgart, 1927
House, Vienna Werkbundsiedlung, 1932
Sebastian-Kelch-Gasse Apartment House, Vienna, 1928
Leopoldine-Gléckel-Hof (apartment building), Vienna, 1932
Bunzl House, Vienna, 1936

Wehtje House, Falsterbo, Sweden, 1936

Selected Publication

Further Reading

1931
A detailed, scholarly catalog of Frank’s designs appears in StritzlerLevine.
A complete catalog of Frank’s textile designs is included in Wangberg-
Eriksson (1999). For a catalog raisonné of Frank’s architectural works, see
Long and Welzig.

Long, Christopher, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002
Spalt, Johannes (editor), Vienna: Hochschule fiir Angewandte Kunst, 1981
Spalt, Johannes, and Hermann Czech (editors), (exhib. cat.), Vienna: Hochschule fiir
Angewandte Kunst, 1981

Spalt, Johannes (editor), (exhib. cat.), Vienna: Hochschule fiir Angewandte Kunst,
1985

Spalt, Johannes (editor), (exhib. cat.), Vienna: Hochschule fiir Angewandte Kunst,
1986

Stritzler-Levine, Nina (editor), New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press,
1996

Wangberg-Eriksson, Kristina, Stockholm: Stockholms Universitet, 1985
Wangberg-Eriksson, Kristina, — Lund: Signum, 1994
Wangberg-Eriksson, Kristina, | Lund: Signum, 1999
Welzig, Maria, Vienna: Béhlau Verlag, 1998

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Frankfurt am Main was, next to Berlin, perhaps Germany’s most important center of
20th-century architectural developments. Its attempts to initiate an era of “New Building”
with innovative social housing programs and extensive public works construction in the
1920s and its impressive post-World War II rebuilding program that culminated with the
creation of a publicly funded “Museum Mile” in the 1980s have given Frankfurt an
architectural prominence that far outweighs its modest size. The building of dozens of
Europe’s tallest skyscrapers has made Frankfurt’s skyline similarly distinctive.

Located on the Main River at the edge of western Germany’s densely populated
Rhein-Main industrial area, Frankfurt is the capital of the German state of Hesse and one
of Europe’s most important banking, commercial, industrial, and transportation centers. It
began the 20th century as a province of Prussia under the guidance of Mayor Franz
Adickes (1846-1915), who initiated a series of reform-minded urban-planning policies.
Before World War I, visitors and professionals from the nascent field of urban planning
flocked to admire Frankfurt’s new streets, boulevards, parks, housing projects, public
transit system, sanitation, and land development schemes. The unique brand of municipal
socialism created by Adickes gave the city government broad powers to create a beautiful
and well-ordered city that planning officials throughout Germany, England, and the
United States envied and sought to copy.

Despite these reforms, Frankfurt, like most other German (indeed European) cities,
suffered a tremendous housing shortage at the end of World War I in 1918. Although
some remedial reforms were implemented immediately after the war, major
improvements did not come until the enactment of the Dawes Plan and the infusion of
American money and loans in 1923 and the election of Social Democrat Ludwig
Landmann as mayor in 1924. Landmann further reorganized the city government and the
tax laws to allow for more efficient planning and construction of housing and public
works and hired the young architect Emst May from Breslau in Silesia to take control of


all building and construction departments in the city. Although May did not solve the
housing crisis he inherited, he initiated an unprecedented program of innovative research,
planning, and construction that once again drew the attention and participation of many
of the Europe’s leading architects and planners.

May’s program called for the greater part of the population to live in a series of new
decentralized satellite cities clustered around the old city core, to which they would be
connected with high-speed roads and public transit. Based on older ideas of the Garden
City movement that May had learned as a student of Raymond Unwin in England, the
new housing estates provided high-density low-rise housing for middle-income workers
both in large blocks and in long row houses. Whereas early satellites developments such
as Bruchfeldstrasse (1926-27, E. May), Rémerstadt (1927-28, E. May), and Praunheim
(1927-29, E. May) were often laid out with more traditional curved streets and
courtyards, the latter ones, such as Westhausen (1929-30, E. May), Hellerhof (1929, M.
Stam), and Am Lindenbaum (1930, W. Gropius), were laid out in rigid, uniform rows
oriented north to south to maximize the solar orientation of each apartment and allow for
greater standardization of building components.

To realize his ambitious plans, May reorganized the municipal construction industry,
making the process faster, cheaper, and better. Through the help of some national
building research grants (RFG), he rationalized the municipal production of materials and
standardized building components, including the lightweight, prefabricated-concrete
panels that were assembled into cubic, flat-roofed housing. May and his team, including
Grete Schiitte-Lihotsky, Martin Elsasser, Adolf Meyer, Emil Kaufmann, and Ferdinand
Kramer, worked hard to define an “existence minimum”—the optimal and most efficient
apartment layout for a given family size. The floor plans, the furnishings, and especially
the “Frankfurt Kitchens” were completely redesigned and mass produced according to
the latest American efficiency theories of C.Frederick, Frederick Taylor, and Henry Ford
in order to minimize costs and work for the housewife. The resulting “New Building”
was, like engineering, striving to be completely objective, rational, and efficient not only
in its construction system but also in its aesthetic and social organization.

The housing program was complemented by an ambitious school-building
program, new libraries, parks and recreation areas, new wholesale markets
and electrical substations, and the implementation of a whole series of
social and cultural reforms to help transform Frankfurt into a more modern
home of the proverbial ““New Man.” May publicized Frankfurt’s reforms
in the avant-garde magazine (The New Frankfurt), which circulated the
innovative ideas to Europe, the United States, Japan, and the rest of the
world. Frankfurt’s successes led the Congrés Internationaux

d’ Architecture Moderne (CIAM) holding its second congress in Frankfurt
to inspect, admire, and share May’s achievement of building over 10,000
new apartments in five years. Le Corbusier, Mies van der Rohe, Walter
Gropius, and many other avant-garde architects of the Modern movement
marveled at the new housing, infrastructure,


Deutsche Bank, by ABB Architects
(1984), Frankfurt

© Derek Croucher/CORBIS

advertising graphics, and schools in the “New Frankfurt” and modeled many new
standards on the Frankfurt prototypes.

In 1930, May and his team of architects left Frankfurt because of increasing pressure
from Germany’s radical right, who labeled May’s modern brand of architecture
“Bolshevik” and unGerman. They went to the Soviet Union, where they had even greater
experimental planning projects. Construction on the “New Frankfurt” continued until
1933, when Hitler’s Nazi regime took over political power of Germany and championed
a more traditional, handcrafted, pitched-roof architecture. Although architectural
development slowed, Frankfurt’s banking, transport, and industrial base made it an
important center for Nazi wartime production. Two of the world’s largest chemical
companies, Hoechst and the former I.G.Farben, makers of the gas used in Nazi
concentration camps, had their headquarters in new buildings in Frankfurt, the former in
a brick Expressionist building by Peter Behrens (1924), the latter in a monumental, stone-
clad, 10-story curved building by Hans Poelzig (1931). After World War II, Poelzig’s
office building was used as headquarters for the U.S. Army, and after 1995, it was slowly
converted into university facilities.

From the fall of 1943 to September 1944 and especially on the night of 22 March
1944, the historic center of Frankfurt was almost completely destroyed by Allied
bombings: of 47,500 buildings, fewer than 8000 survived at least in part. After the war,
expecting to become the headquarters of Allied occupation forces, Frankfurt’s planners
elected to reconstruct their city based primarily on considerations of efficient traffic
arteries and large building lots rather than restoring the original medieval city fabric.
After rubble removal in the late 1940s, rebuilding started in the 1950s alongside West
Germany’s economic recovery. The modern, International Style buildings designed by
May’s colleague Ferdinand Kramer as well as well-known younger architects, such as
Egon Eiermann, Sep Ruf, and Gottfried Bohm, still dominate downtown Frankfurt. With
the relocation of the West German Central Bank to Frankfurt in 1957, the city grew
rapidly into the largest banking and stock exchange center of Germany, the home of one
of Europe’s largest and architecturally significant convention centers, with exhibit halls
by F.V.Thiersch (1907), O.M.Ungers (1984), and Helmut Jahn (1989), and home to
Europe’s largest and busiest train station, one of the busiest airports in the world, and
some of Germany’s busiest Autobahn crossings.

In the late 1970s, citizens began to demand more spending on cultural affairs and the
creation of a more humane cityscape. They voted to restore and reconstruct their war-torn
central Rémer Square with its surrounding 16th-century merchants’ houses, using
traditional half-timber framing techniques. The city also began the creation and
construction of a series of worldclass museums, most of which were located on a short
stretch of riverbank across from the downtown in the more traditional Sachsenhausen
neighborhood. Unger’s German Architecture Museum (1984) and Richard Meier’s
Museum of Applied Arts (1985) added on to early 20th-century villas, whereas the
German Postal Museum (1990, G.Behnisch), the Museum of Modern Art (1991,
H.Hollein), and the Schirn Kunsthalle (1985, D.Bangert, BJansen, S.Scholz, and
A.Schultes) are completely new structures.

Although the tall banking towers had already earned the city the nicknames
“Bankfurt,” “Mainhattan,” and “Chicago on the Main,” during the final decade of the
century Frankfurt added a whole series of Europe’s tallest and most innovative new
skyscrapers. The trend started with Ungers’ Torhaus (1984) and Jahn’s Messeturm (1991)
at the convention center. On the skyline, the blue-glass twin towers of the Deutsche Bank
(1984) downtown were soon joined by the DG Bank “Crown” tower (1993) by Kohn
Pederson Fox and the Commerzbank Tower (1997) by Sir Norman Foster, which
contains large multistory atriums every eight floors with trees to help condition the
building’s air. Frankfurt’s recent designation as the home of the European Union’s new
central bank has only fueled the construction boom—the Landesbank Hessen is planning
a tower by Peter Schweiger, and German Telekom is planning a skyscraper by Richard
Rogers. The second “New Frankfurt,” created alongside the new museums and banks, has
once again become a fertile ground for architectural innovation and admiration.


KAI K.GUTSCHOW

Further Reading

Kalusche is the best and most up-to-date guidebook to individual buildings. Many studies

exist of the “New Building” in Frankfurt in the 1920s, of which Mohr is the most

authoritative, and Bullock perhaps the best English summary. Hirdina’s anthology of

articles from provides invaluable contemporary source material. The recent museums

and skyscrapers are reviewed in countless architecture periodicals.

Bullock, Nicholas, “Housing in Frankfurt 1925-1931 and the New Wohnkultur,” 163

(1978)

Fehl, Gerhard, “The Niddatal Project: The Unfinished Satellite Town on the Outskirts of

Frankfurt,” 9 (1983)
Henderson, Susan Rose, “A Setting for Mass Culture: Life and Leisure in the Nidda

Valley,” 10 (1995)

Hirdina, Heinz (editor), Berlin: Elefanten, 1984
Jonak, Ulf, Frankfurt and New York: Campus, 1997
Kalusche, Bernd, and Wolf-Christian Setzepfandt, (bilingual German-English
edition), Berlin: Reimer, 1992; 2nd edition, 1997
Ladd, Brian, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1990
Lane, Barbara Miller, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1968
Mohr, Christoph, and Michael Miiller, Frankfurt: Fricke, 1984
Prigge, Walter, and Hans-Peter Schwarz (editors), Frankfurt: Vervuert, 1988

FREY, ALBERT 1903-1998

Architect, United States

Albert Frey holds a unique place in the history of 20th century Californian architecture
as an uncompromising modernist of the European school, a pupil of Le Corbusier, and an
exponent of high-tech and rationalist architecture who lived out his long life in the hills
above Palm Springs, California.

Frey spent the early part of his career working for Belgian modernist architects Jules
Eggericx and Raphael Verwilghen in Brussels, where he was involved with rebuilding
housing following the Great War. He returned to Switzerland in 1927 to work for the firm
of Leuenberger, Fluckiger before moving to Paris in 1928 to work for Le Corbusier and
Pierre Jeanneret for nine months. In Le Corbusier’s atelier he sat between Charlotte
Perriand and Jose Louis Sert, working on the Centrosoyus Administration Building in
Moscow (1933) and the Villa Savoye (1931) at Poissy. Here he was introduced to and,

like Richard Neutra before him, found himself drawn to the American dream of a
technological future.

Upon his arrival in New York in September of 1930, Frey began working with A.
Lawrence Kocher, architect and editor of | in a partnership that would last until 1935.
The most significant building of Frey’s early career was the exhibition house designed
for the 1931 Allied Arts and Building Products exhibition at the Grand Central Palace in
New York. Called the “Aluminaire House” because of its ribbed aluminum cladding and
its qualities of lightness and airiness, it was strongly influenced by Le Corbusier’s
Maison Citrohan (1920) projects and Maison Cook at Boulonge-sur-Seine (1926-27), as
well as Frey’s own investigations of mass housing, as evidenced in schemes published in
in April 1931. The aluminum- and steel-framed house, with its innovative floor and
wall construction, was subsidized by subscriptions Frey raised from manufacturers and
erected in ten days. Following the exhibition it was bought by the architect Wallace
Harrison, disassembled in six hours and moved to his estate on Long Island. It has now
been rebuilt at the New York Institute of Technology, at Islip, Long Island.
In 1934 Frey traveled to Palm Springs, California, to supervise the building of the
Kocher-Samson office building for Kocher’s brother, a medical doctor. While there he
met John Porter Clark and, terminating his partnership with Kocher, began working with
Clark in a partnership that continued almost uninterrupted until 1957. A brief interlude in
New York in 1938-39, where he worked on the Museum of Modern Art for Philip L
Goodwin, and on a design for the Swiss Pavilion for the World’s Fair with Kocher that is
reproduced most memorably in his book,

Frey’s philosophy was evinced in the first house he built for himself in 1940.
Assembled out of industrial-type materials, Frey House | (Palm Springs, 1940) was a
simple cubic cabin with extending wall planes and an over-reaching, flat roof probing the
landscaped desert around it. These ideas were further explored in the Hatton House and
Guest House (1945) and the Loewy House (1947), all in Palm Springs. The extension of
Frey House | in 1947 and again in 1953, with the introduction of bright, electric colors
and profiled metal and ribbed fiberglass cladding, gave it a noticeably futuristic quality
while at the same time incorporating it within the planting and water pools of its natural
site. Although an experimental house, its idiosyncrasies were a direct responses to the
particularities of its desert condition.

With Clark he built a number of crisp, more conventionally modernist buildings,
including elementary and secondary schools in Palm Springs and Needles, and hospitals
at Banning and Palm Springs. These long, low, planar buildings spread out against the
desert landscape, external circulation, play or convalescing areas taking advantage of the
climate. Joined in partnership in 1952 by Robson Chambers, Clark and Frey built the
Palm Springs City Hall (1957) using a palette of traditional and industrial materials. The
design was sensitive to both function and climate, the administrative offices forming a
low, steelscreened T-shaped building with the council chamber expressed as a jagged,
masonry block at one end. Concrete and steel one circular and the other square, marked
the respective entrances to the council chamber and the city hall, the circular form of the
former corresponding to the void within the latter.

Frey House 2 (1965) was built on a mountainside on axis with and overlooking the
centre of Palm Springs, the City Hall visible in the distance. Raised on a concrete-block
podium which incorporated the car port below and the swimming pool above, the house


appeared to be no more than a glass and steel lean-to cabin, carelessly decaying in the
desert landscape. The architecture is literally subsumed in Nature as a giant rock pushes
through a glass wall, separating the sleeping from the living area and providing, by way
of its mass, a thermal regulator.

NEIL JACKSON

Aluminum; Aluminaire House, Long Island, New York

Biography

Born in Ziirich, Switzerland, 18 October 1903; studied architecture at the Institute of
Technology in Winterthur, training in traditional building construction; worked in 1925
for architects Jean-Jules Eggericx and Raphael Verwilghen in Brussels, Belgium, where
he was involved with rebuilding housing following the Great War; returned to
Switzerland (1927) where he worked for Leuenberger, Fluckiger before moving to Paris
(1928) to work for Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret for nine months. Arrived in New
York, 5 September 1930; worked with Philip L.Goodwin (1938-39) on the design of
New York’s Museum of Modern Art. Established partnership with John Porter Clark,
Palm Springs, 1934-57; Died 14 November 1998 in Palm Springs.

Selected Publications

New York: Architectural Book Publishing, 1939, and Santa Monica:
HennesseytIngalls, 1999

Further Reading

Golub, Jennifer, | New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999
Jackson, Neil, | London and New York: Spon, 1996
Jackson, Neil, “Aluminaire House, USA (Kocher and Frey),” in —_ edited by Allen
Cunningham, London: Spon, 1998
Jackson, Neil, “Desert Pioneer,’ 1147, no. 9 (1992)
Rosa, Joseph, © New York: Rizzoli International, 1990

FULLER, RICHARD BUCKMINSTER
1895-1983

Architect and philosopher, United States

The American Richard Buckminster Fuller has been variously labeled architect,
engineer, author, designer-inventor, educator, poet, cartographer, ecologist, philosopher,
teacher, and mathematician throughout his career. Although not trained professionally as
an architect, Fuller has been accepted within the architectural profession, receiving
numerous awards and honorary degrees. He thought of himself as a comprehensive
human in the universe, implementing research for the good of humanity. Born in Milton,
Massachusetts, on 12 July 1895, he was the son of Richard Buckminster Fuller, Sr., and
Caroline Wolcott (Andrews) Fuller. His father, who worked as a leather and tea merchant
with offices in Boston, died when Fuller was 15 years of age. Fuller’s first design
revelation came to him when, in kindergarten in 1899, he built his first flat-space frame,
an octet truss constructed of dried peas and toothpicks. As a boy, vacationing at his
family’s summerhouse on Bear Island, Maine, he became an adequate seaman and
developed an appreciation of nature’s provision of principles of efficient design. He
followed the philosophy of Pythagoras and Newton, that the universe comprises signs, or
patterns of energy relationships, that have an order to them. Fuller used the term
“valving” for the transformation of these patterns into usable forms. According to Fuller,
these patterns in nature were comprehensive and universal. “Syn-ergy” was the name that
Fuller gave to the integrated behavior patterns discovered in nature.

Fuller attended the Milton Academy (1904—06) and Harvard University (1913-15) and
was expelled twice while at Harvard. He worked in a few industries and then enlisted for
two years of service in the U.S. Navy (1917-19). This experience in industry and with the
Navy helped him gain knowledge of technical engineering processes, materials, and
methods of manufacturing, which he would apply this knowledge to future inventions.
When one of his two daughters, Alexandra, died of influenza at age four (1922), Fuller
became obsessed with her death. Five years later, on the brink of suicide, he decided
instead to devote the rest of his life to helping humanity by converting ideas and
technology designed for weaponry into ideas for “livingry.” At the age of 32, he started
an experiment, Guinea Pig B (the “B” stood for “Bucky,” his nickname), to discover how
an individual with a moral commitment and limited financial means could apply his
knowledge to improve humanity’s living conditions by technological determinism. This
experiment continued until his death at age 88. Thus, his technological and economica.
resources belonged to society. He believed in the same moralistic drive to develop better
housing for the masses through mass production that many of the European modernists
did, but Fuller’s forms and design principles were quite different.

Among the proliferation of books that Fuller published during his life, the
first, (1928), propagated his lifetime philosophy. The term “4D” meant

“fourth-dimensional” thinking, adding time to the dimensions of space to


ensure gains for humanity instead of personal gains only. The first patent
of the 4D designs was a mass-production house, first known as 4D and
later as the Dymaxion House (1927 model; 1928 patent). A hexagonal
structure supported on a mast, the house was to be air deliverable and
based on his strategy of “design science,” which sought to obtain
maximum human advantage from minimum use of energy and materials.
Using the analogy of airplane technology, he chose materials such as steel-
alloy cables and the Duralumin mast. After developing the Dymaxion
House, Fuller was to engage in developing prototypes of the Dymaxion
Vehicles (1937) and the Dymaxion Bathroom (1940). Later he developed
the Dymaxion Deployment Unit (1944), a lightweight corrugated-steel
shelter made from modified grain bins. Thousands of these units were
bought by the U.S. Army Air Corps for use as flight crew quarters. The
Dymaxion Deployment Unit became the basis for Fuller’s Wichita House
(1946). These

Construction plan of the geodesic
dome, designed by R.Buckminster
Fuller

© 1981 Carl Solway Gallery, Cincinnati.
Photo courtesy Library of Congress

houses were built to be used as full-size family dwellings, weighing four tons each, and
were to be assembled on aircraft production lines built during the war. Another of
Fuller’s Dymaxion inventions was the Dymaxion Airocean World Map (1946). This map
transferred the spherical data of a globe onto a twodimensional surface.

Fuller, however, is best known for inventing the geodesic dome (1954), a triangulated
space-enclosing technology. According to Fuller, this type of structure encloses the
maximum internal volume with the least surface area. Designs such as the domes were
based on synergy and its connection with mathematics, using such forms as the
tetrahedron, octahedron, and icosahedron. Fuller brought into the dome structure ideas
concerning the dome’s tensile ability by introducing a new structural geometry and
advancing mechanics into the dome form. He tried to emulate in this structure the atom’s
form, including the compound curvature trussing of its dynamic structure. Although this
domical design was not new in its elementary form, it was new in its manner of
employing these principles in a human-made structure. Numerous domes have appeared
all over the world for domestic as well as large-scale industrial use, including the Union
Tank Car Company (1958), Baton Rouge, Louisiana; the Climatron Botanical Garden
(1961), St. Louis, Missouri; the U.S. Pavilion (1967) at Expo ‘67, the World’s Fair,
Montreal, Canada; and the Spruce Goose Hangar (1982), Long Beach, California.

As noted by architectural historian Kenneth Frampton in his book, (1980), Fuller
has influenced future generations of architects, most notably the Japanese group the
Metabolists, the British group Archigram, Moshe Safdie, Alfred Neuman, Cedric Price,
and Norman Foster. A few semiotician scholars liken him to Joyce, but whereas Joyce
sought to obscure language intentionally, Fuller sought to emphasize a precise meaning.
Often he would invent words for this purpose, as displayed in his numerous writings and
lectures. Later in life, he entered into partnership with Shoji Sadao in New York and
Sadao and Zung Architects in Cleveland, Ohio (1979-83). Fuller died on | July 1983 in
Los Angeles, California, from a massive heart attack; his wife died three days later.

REBECCA DALVESCO

Biography

Born in Milton, Massachusetts, 12 July 1895. Studied, Milton Academy, Milton,
Massachusetts 1914-1906; Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1913-15;
attended, United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland 1917. Married Anne
Hewlett, daughter of architect James Monroe Hewlett 1917:2 children. Served, United
States Navy 1917-19. Assistant export manager, Armour and Company, New York
1919-21; National Accounts Sales Manager, Kelly-Springfield Truck Company 1922;
president, Stockdale Building System, Chicago 1922-27. Founder and president, 4D
Company, Chicago 1927-32; editor and publisher, Philadelphia 1930-32; founder,
director, chief engineer, Dymaxion Corporation, Bridgeport, Connecticut 1932-36;
assistant to the director of Research and Development, Phelps Dodge Corporation, New
York 1936-38; technical consultant, New York 1938-40; vice president, chief engineer,
Dymaxion Company, Delaware 1940-50; chief mechanical engineer, United States
Board of Economic Warfare, Washington, D.C. 1942-44; special assis tant to the Deputy
Director of the United States Foreign Economic Administration, Washington, D.C. 1944;


chairman, chief engineer, Dymaxion Dwelling Machine Corporation, Wichita, Kansas
1944-46; chairman, Fuller Research Foundation, Wichita 1946-54; president, Geodesics
Incorporated, Forest Hills, New York from 1949; president, Synergetics Incorporated,
Raleigh, North Carolina 1954-59; president, Plydomes Incorporated, Des Moines, Iowa
from 1957; chairman, Tetrahelix Corporation, Hamilton, Ohio from 1959; editor-at-large,

New York 1972-75; senior partner, Fuller and Sadao, Long Island from 1979;
chairman of the board, R.Buckminster Fuller, Sadao and Zung Architects, Cleveland,
Ohio from 1979; senior partner, Buckminster Fuller Associates, London from 1979.
Research professor 1959-68, university professor 1968-75, distinguished university
professor 1972-75, professor emeritus from 1975, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale; Charles Eliot Norton Professor of Poetry, Harvard University 1962-63;
Harvey Cushing Orator, American Association of Neuro-Surgeons 1967; Nehru Lecturer,
New Delhi 1969; Hoyt Fellow, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 1969; fellow,
St. Peter’s College, Oxford 1970; World Fellow in Residence, consortium of the
University of Pennsylvania, Haverford College, Swarthmore College, Bryn Mawr
College, and University City Science Center, Philadelphia, and consultant to the Design
Science Institute, Philadelphia 1972-83; tutor in design science, International
Community College, Los Angeles 1975. President, Triton Foundation, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 1967; consultant to architects, Team 3, Penang, Malaysia from 1974;
international president, MENSA, Paris 1975; international president, World Society for
Ekistics, Athens 1975; member, National Academy of Design; fellow, American Institute
of Architects; fellow, Building Research Institute of the National Academy of Sciences;
life fellow, American Association for the Advancement of Science; member, National
Institute of Arts and Letters; fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences; member,
Mexican Institute of Architects; honorary member, Society of Venezuelan Architects;
honorary member, Israel Institute of Engineers and Architects; honorary member,
Zenralvereiningung der Architekten Osterreichs; honorary member, Royal Society of
Siamese Architects; honorary member, Royal Architectural Institute of Canada; Ben
Franklin Fellow, Royal Society of Arts; honorary fellow, Royal Institute of British
Architects; honorary fellow, Royal Academy of Fine Art, the Netherlands. Royal Gold
Medal, Royal Institute of British Architects 1968; Gold Medal, American Institute of
Architects 1970; R.Buckminster Fuller Chair of Architecture established at the University
of Detroit 1970. Died in Los Angeles, 1 July 1983.

Selected Works

Dymaxion House (design), 1927 model/1928 patent

Dymaxion Car (prototype; patented), 1937

Dymaxion Bathroom (prototype; patented), 1940

Dymaxion Deployment Unit (prototype; patented), 1944

Wichita House, Kansas, 1946 Dymaxion Airocean World Map, 1946

Geodesic Dome (patented), 1954

United States Air Force Early Warning Systems Domes, Arctic Circle, 1954

Union Tank Car Company Quarter Sphere, Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Los Angeles; and
Wood River, Illinois, 1958

Climatron Botanical Garden, St. Louis, Missouri, 1961
United States Pavilion (destroyed), Expo 1967, Montreal, 1967
Spruce Goose Airplane Hangar, Long Beach, California, 1982

Selected Publications

1928
(with Robert W.Marks), 1960
1963
1963
1968
(with E.J. Applewhite), 1975
(with E.J.Applewhite), 1979

1980
1983
Further Reading
Applewhite, E.J., New York: Macmillan, 1977
Baldwin, Jay, New York: Wiley, 1996
Edmondson, Amy C, Boston: Birkhauser, 1987
Fuller, R.Buckminster, 4 vols., edited by E.J.Applewhite, New York: Garland,
1986

Hatch, Alden, New York: Crown, 1974
Kenner, Hugh, New York: Morrow, 1973
Marks, Robert, New York: Reinhold, 1960
McHale, John, New York: Braziller, 1962
Meller, James (editor), London: Cape, 1970
Pawley, Martin, | New York: Taplinger, and London: Trefoil, 1990
Robertson, Donald W., New York: Vantage Press, 1974
Sieden, Lloyd Steven, New York: Plenum Press, 1989
Ward, James (editor), 4 vols., New York: Garland, 1984

FUTURISM

Italian in origin and concept, futurism was first theorized by Filippo Tomaso Marinetti in
a manifesto published on 20 February 1909 in the French daily . Futurism soon became
a movement central to the process of radical artistic renovation carried out by the
European avant-garde. It dealt both with cultural debates specific to Italian art of the first
two decades of the 20th century and with crucial discourses of the European artistic

revival in general. While affecting primarily the arts in the more restrictive sense of the
term—under the influence of Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carra, Gino Severini, and Mario
Chiattone—its most notable representatives in Italian architecture were Giacomo Balla
and Antonio Sant’Elia but also, in various degrees, such architects as Adalberto Libera
and Angiolo Mazzoni, among others. The close collaboration between futurist artists and
architects is evidenced by the fact that the first and only exhibition of futurist architecture
held in Italy of the period was curated by a painter, Fillia, who also edited journals on
topics such as “The Futurist City’ and in 1932 wrote a book, in which he gave a
comprehensive view of the significance of the movement.

Most sensitive to the challenges of the new “machinist society” (Le Corbusier) among
the avant-garde artists and architects, the promoters of futurism were concerned primarily
with expressing movement and mechanical speed, which they saw as _ essential
determinants of modernity. The futurists extended their artistic vision to the study of the
latest conquest of modern science with an undivided enthusiasm for all of what they
perceived to be radical facts of the contemporary civilization. They rejected emphatically
the old canons of static prespectival representation and invoked instead the redemptive
force of the universal dynamism brought about by the machine, itself central to the new
forms of visualization.

Such a proposition was translated in architecture first through visionary
representations of cities shaped by speedy automotive vehicles and later through the
redefinition of the Modern movement’s functionalist themes in terms of extreme
flexibility and mobility (Libera’s imaginary villas, Mazzoni’s control tower for the
Florentine train station, and Le Corbusier’s inhabited high-ways).

The best-known early projects of futurist architecture are Sant’Elia’s and Mario
Chiatone’s urban experiments exhibited in Milan in 1914. The spatial relationships of the
city fabric were determined in the first place by an elaborate system of monumental
arteries distributed hierarchically through and underneath huge “streamlined”
skyscrapers, anticipating the post-Art Deco aesthetics of the 1930s, including Libera’s
entrance to the commemorative (1932) or his analogous Italian Pavilion of the 1933
Century of Progress Exposition, Chicago. Sant’Elia’s pre-World War I “citta nuova”
projects informed significantly Marinetti himself, who published commonly regarded
as one of the most important documents of modern Italian architecture.

The thrust that futurism put on solving problems of motorized transportation and its
diversification according to speed and purpose—including strict segregation of pedestrian
circulation—had a significant influence on Le Corbusier’s 1922 speculative
Contemporary City for Three Million Inhabitants, the touchstone of pre-Chandigarh Le
Corbusian urbanism. This influence can be seen as well in the Amsterdam Rokin project
by Mart Stam and that of other European architects, Le Corbusier’s Plan Obus in
particular. Whereas at the eve of World War II the early Russian artistic and literary
avant-garde evolved a genre with a similar name—the Cubo-Futurism of Kasimir
Malevich, Khruchenikh, and Khlebnikov—with little significant connection with the
Italian movement proper, the postrevolutionary Soviet Constructivism (Chernikhov’s
mechanical architecture, Melnikov’s dynamic garages and exploded _ theaters,
Mayakovsky’s “urban poetry,” or Dziga Vertov’s cinematic constructions) played a
significant role in the development of futurism in Italy (Libera’s and Giuseppe Terragni’s
rooms at the 1932 ).


After Dusseldorf, where he designed the interior of the Lowenstein house, Balla
conceived the interior of the via Milano Bal-Tic-Tac ballroom (1921) in Rome, often
seen as the first experiment in avant-garde architectural aesthetic in Rome. Vit-torio
Marchi, who wrote two books on futurist architecture in 1924 and 1928, designed the
Pirandello Theater in Rome.

In Italy, where modern and experimental architecture was never banished under
Fascism—and indeed was favored by Mussolini—the futurists emphatically tied their fate
to the new regime and imploded with it in time. Still, the extraordinary mass development
of automobile circulation after the country recovered from the disasters of both war and
Fascism and the increased need, under the circumstances, for pedestrian segregation
along with the desire to emphasize the particular urban character of mechanized
transportation have led urban planners since the early 1960s in Italy to search back for the
still-valid aspects of the futurist credo.

DANILO UDOVICKI-SELB
Citta Nuova (1914); Constructivism; Contemporary City for Three
Million Inhabitants; Corbusier, Le (Jeanneret, Charles-Edouard) (France);
Libera, Adalberto (Italy); Russia and Soviet Union; Sant’Elia, Antonio

(Italy); Terragni, Giuseppe (Italy)

Further Reading

Apollonio, Umbro, Milan: Mazzotta, 1970; as | New York: Viking, and London:
Thames and Hudson, 1973
Balla, Giacomo, Milan: Direzione del Movimento Futurista, 1915; reprint, in
Modena, Italy: Fonte d’Abisso, 1989
Boccioni, Umberto, Milan: Direzione del Movimento Futurista, 1912
Calvesi, Maurizio, Milan: Lerici, 1966
Clough, Rosa Trillo, New York: Philosophical Library, 1961
Doordan, Dennis P., New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1988
Drudi Gambillo, Maria, and Teresa Fiori, editors, 2 vols., Rome: De Luca, 1958-62
Humphreys, Richard, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999
Marchi, Vittorio, Foligno: Campitelli, 1924
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, Paris: Sansot, 1911; reprint, Lausanne: L’Age d’Homme,
1980
Nash, John Malcolm, London: Thames and Hudson, 1974; Woodbury, New York:
Barron’s, 1978
Portoghesi, Paolo, Rome: De Luca, 1968
Rye, Jane, London: Studio Vista, and New York: Dutton, 1972
Scrivo, Luigi, Rome: Bulzoni, 1968
Taylor, Joshua Charles, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1961
