BOOK Nikolaus Pevsner.pdf
Introduction

Where lie the sources of the twentieth century ? Sources bespeak
a stream, then a river, and finally, in our particular case, the
ocean of the International Style of the 1930s. Do Prometheus
and the unknown inventor of the wheel stand by the source as
the genii fontis? No; because there are breaks, and our civiliza-
tion is not connected with that distant past by a continuous flow.
But even if we admit that civilizations ‘rise and fall, crumble,
are extended, Are renewed, destroyed’, even if we keep within
Western civilization, are the sources of the twentieth century
then the invention of clocks with wheels and weights and of
printing with movable type? They are; for without printing
and clocking-in there could be no twentieth century. Mass
communication and mass production are among the things
distinguishing ours from all preceding centuries. However, it
is only the quantitative exploitation which belongs exclusively
to us, not the invention itself. And that is indeed a phenomenon
to rank high in force among the sources of the twentieth century
and therefore of modern art.

The twentieth century is the century of the masses: mass
education, mass entertainment, mass transport, universities with
twenty thousand students, comprehensive schools for two
thousand children, hospitals with two thousand beds, stadia
with a hundred thousand seats. That is one aspect; the other is
speed of locomotion, every citizen being an express-train driver
on his own, and some pilots travelling faster than sound. Both
are only expressions of the technological fanaticism of the age,
and technology is only an application of science.

Science, technology, mass locomotion, mass production and
consumption, mass communication — in the field of the visual
arts which is our field in this book, that means the predominance
of architecture and design over the beaux-arts, it means the

7

predominance of the city over the small town and the country,
and it means the concentration on architecture and design for
the masses and on what new materials and new techniques can
do for them.

If this is accepted as a diagram of the twentieth century, so far
as we can observe and analyse it, where do its sources lie then?
We can now endeavour to list and consider them in their order
of time.

CHAPTER ONE

A Style for the Age

Architecture and design for the masses must be functional, in
the sense that they must be acceptable to all and that their well-
functioning is the primary necessity. A chair can be uncomfort-
able and a work of art, but only the occasional connoisseur can
be expected to prefer its aesthetic to its utilitarian qualities. The
plea for functionalism is the first of our sources. Augustus
Welby Northmore Pugin, born in 1812, the English son of a
French father, wrote on the first page of his most important
book: ‘There should be no features about a building which are
not necessary for convenience, construction, or propriety . . .
The smallest detail should . .. serve a purpose, and construction
itself should vary with the material employed.’! That was
written in 1841, but it was not new then. It is the direct continua-
tion of the principle of French seventeenth and eighteenth
century rationalism. Architecture, writes Batteaux,? ‘is not a
spectacle . . . but a service’, and ‘security, fitness, convenience,
propriety’ are all familiar from Cordemoy to Boffrand and the
younger Blondel. To quote two less familiar passages, neither
French: Hogarth called the first chapter of his Analysis of Beauty,
‘Of Fitness’, starting thus: ‘Fitness of the parts to the design for
which every individual thing is form’d . . . is of the greatest
consequence to the beauty of the whole. . . In ship-building the
dimensions of every part are confin’d and regulated by fitness
for sailing. When a vessel sails well, the sailors call her a beauty;
the two ideas have such a connection.’3 And the Abbate Lodoli,
not uninfluenced perhaps by Hogarth, referred in hisstimulating
conversations to the Venetian gondola as a piece of functional
design, and stipulated that nothing ought to appear ina building
which is not ‘truly fulfilling its function’ or: ‘has not its own
proper function’ and is not ‘an integral part of the fabric’ and
designed in a logical relation to the ‘nature of the material’.

9

The fact that Pugin, who caine first in this string of quotations,
called the book which he started with this clarion call The True
Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture, the fact that his
principal purpose was not a plea for functionalism but for the
Gothic Revival as the expression of a Catholic Revival, even
the fact that he argued extremely intelligently the functional
aspect of the Gothic style, of buttresses, of rib-vaults and so on,
all these facts do not concern us at present. He was read by the
Gothicists, but he was also read by the Functionalists. For such
existed among the mid-nineteenth century writers and thinkers.
Gottfried Semper in Germany, with his explanation of the
applied or decorative arts as conditioned by materials and tech-
niques, was one of them. He had lived in London asa refugee in
the years 1851-5, and must have been in contact with the small
group of architects, artists and administrators responsible for
the preparation, the success and the ruthless criticism of the
Great Exhibition of 1851: Henry Cole in the first place, Owen
Jones, Matthew Digby Wyatt and Richard Redgrave in the
second.

These men, even before the exhibition, had issued a small
journal called the Journal of Design and Manufactures and in this
had applied the principles of Pugin, as Semper was going to do
later, to matters of craft and industrial art. Pugin had objected
to carpets where one walks ‘upon highly relieved foliage’ ,5 the
Journal now insisted that carpets should keep to ‘a level or low
plane’,® that wallpapers should convey ‘the proper impression
of flatness’? and in a more general way, that ‘the first considera-
tion of the designer should be perfect adaptation to intended
use’ and that every object ‘to afford perfect pleasure must be fit
for the purpose and true in its construction’ .?

No wonder that these men, when the Crystal Palace had gone
up and been filled with the proudest products of all nations,
were appalled at the standard of taste displayed. ‘The absence of
any fixed principle in ornamental design is most apparent,’ they
wrote, and ‘the taste of the producers is uneducated’.!° No
wonder cither that they admired the Crystal Palace itself.

10

1 The Crystal Palace, built for the Great Exhibition of 1851 and re-erected
at Sydenham in 1853 (above, looking along the roof to the ‘transept’).
Joseph Paxton’s building, which was entirely prefabricated, marked the
first major escape from historical styles in architecture

The Crystal Palace is the mid-nineteenth century touchstone,
if one wishes to discover what belongs wholly to the nineteenth
century and what points forward into the twentieth. The

. Crystal Palace was entirely of iron and glass, it was designed by
a non-architect, and it was designed for industrial quantity
production of its parts. It is a source in one sense, but it also had
its sources, and they take us back once again to the cighteenth
century. The use of iron in architecture starts in France in the
1780s with Soufflot and Victor Louis, who were especially
concerned with making theatres fireproof, and in England in
the 1790s with manufacturers who, acting as their own designers,
attempted to make their factories fireproof. In both cases the

vr

iron was an expedient of high utilitarian but of no aesthetic
significance. It came into the open, as it were, playfully and only
internally, in some romantic buildings such as Nash’s Royal
Pavilion at Brighton in 181 §~20, and seriously and externally in
the great bridges of the same years. The carliest iron bridge was
in fact designed as carly as 1777 — the Coalbrookdale Bridge in
England. It has a span of 100 feet. It was at once surpassed by the
bridge at Sunderland which in 1793-6 spanned 206 feet, and
this by James Finley’s Schuylkill Bridge of 1809, with 306 feet.
The two English bridges had been iron arches, the Schuylkill
Bridge was a suspension bridge, and the suspension principle
gave us the finest of the carly nineteenth-century bridges such

2 Coalbrookdale Bridge, Shropshire, 1777-81, the first iron bridge in the
world. Its builder, the ironmaster Abraham Darby, was assisted by a minor
architect, T.F. Pritchard. The bridge crosses the Severn with a span of one
hundred feet


3 The Menai Suspension Bridge, linking North Wales with the Isle of
Anglesey, was built by Thomas Telford between 1818 and 1826 as part of
the Holyhead to Chester Road. Telford, the greatest road and canal
engineer of the early nineteenth century, had earlier designed a vast single-
span iron bridge of unprecedented boldness (never built) to replace
London Bridge

as Thomas Telford’s Menai Bridge of 1818-26 with a main span
of $79 feet.

Some architects later in the nineteenth century — Matthew
Digby Wyatt among them — were ready to count them among
the finest structures of the century. But they were not the work
of architects. The architects, as we have seen, had been ready
to use iron in a minor way, where necessity arose, but otherwisc
at best they only played with it. Now this is what Wyatt wrote
in 1850-1, apropos the bridges, these ‘wonders of the world’:
‘From such beginnings what glories may be in reserve ... we
may trust ourselves to dream, but we dare not predict.’'!
This was the year of the Crystal Palace. Pugin called it the ‘glass
monster’,}2 Ruskin a ‘cucumber frame’,!? but Wyatt wrote
that the building was likely to accelerate the ‘consummation
devoutly to be wished’ and that ‘the novelty of its form and
details . . . will exercise a powerful influence upon national
taste’.14 A little later he even foretold from the union ofiron and
glass ‘a new era in architecture’.15 This was seill in 1851.

13

wo cain HN f

t
4

§ The Bibliothéque Ste-Geneviéve in Paris, by Henri Labrouste (1843-50),
an iron-frame structure frankly revealed as such. At this date iron-framing
was normally given a stone or plaster disguise

But by then, a few of the most adventurous architects of
repute had begun to take notice of iron, and Labrouste’s
Bibliothéque Ste-Geneviéve in Paris of 1843-50 and Bunning’s
Coal Exchange in London of 1846-9 remain the earliest build- Ills.
ings whose aesthetic character is determined by iron. Labrouste’s
has the greater elegance and ornamental restraint, as Labrouste
was indeed doubtless the better architect of the two. That comes
out even more clearly in the exteriors: Bunning’s of an un-
principled jollity which was accepted at the time in England as
belonging to the Free or Mixed Renaissance; Labrouste’s also
ofthe Renaissance and also a free Renaissance, but treated nobly,
with discipline and cconomy of decoration. And both architects

| hid their display of iron behind solid stone.

4 Part of the icon-galleried interior of the Coal Exchange in London, by J.B
Bunning (1846-9). Its demolition in 1962 was one of London’s most serious and
futile recent losses

Wyatt appreciated Bunning, a greater man appreciated
Labrouste and was guided by him: Emanuel Viollet-le-Duc
(1814-79). When Labrouste stopped teaching, his pupils
induced Viollet-le-Duc to take over, and he taught for a short
time. In connection with this he began to deliver his Entretiens
in 1858, published the first volume in 1863 and the more
important second in 1872. His approach to architecture is the
functionalist’s. He demands the ‘alliance of form with need’ and
with ‘the means of construction’.'®6 He demands truth: that
‘stone should appear as stone, iron as iron and wood as wood’,!7
that no ‘monumental appearances should conceal bourgeois
habits’.18 And consequently he insists on the necessity ofa style
for the nineteenth century. Today, he says, ‘we possess immense
resources provided by industry and ease of transportation.’!9
Architecture belongs ‘almost as much to science as to art’.20
Architects must cease to be interested only in whether their
facades are to be Roman, Gothic or Renaissance. From that
attitude ‘nothing new or living can come’.?! When engineers
invented the locomotive ‘it did not occur to them to imitate the
harness of a stage coach’.2? If architects want to prevent their
profession from becoming obsolete they must become ‘skilful
constructors, ready to take advantage of all the resources
furnished by our society’.?3 And so he arrives at iron, proposes
iron even for ribs in vaults (as Boileau had already shown it in
Paris churches) and even for externally visible framing.

Bold words indeed, but what were the deeds? Viollet-le-Duc
was the great restorer of French cathedrals, the great scholar of
Gothic architecture — though admittedly with a keen sense of
structure. Like Pugin before him, he did not practise what he
preached. His opposite number in England was Sir George
Gilbert Scott, also a self-confident restorer, also a scholar of
Gothic architecture of no mean achievement, who could write:
‘An iron arched bridge may always be made beautiful, and it
would be difficult to make a suspension bridge anything else’ and
“Tt is self-evident that... modern metallic construction opens
out a perfectly new field for architectural development.’24

16

fl 03

ad pet nu ii,

AMEE

6 W.H. Barlow’s train-shed of St Pancras Station, London, of 1864: a
tremendous feat of engincering with its pointed arch spanning 243 feet

But it was not his field, as it was not Viollet-lc-Duc’s. When
he was asked to design a hotel in connection with the new
St Pancras Station in London, he provided a towering Gothic
pile hiding entirely the magnificent metallic construction which
the engineer William H. Barlow had erected behind it as a
train-shed and which, with its span of 243 feet, was the largest
span ever, until then, achieved by man. It remained the largest
in Europe for twenty-five years, until it was finally vastly sur-
passed by Dutert and Contamin’s splendid Halle des Machines at
the Paris Exhibition of 1889, with its 362 feet span.

17

But while iron and glass, and the new aesthetic vocabulary
which its extensive use entailed, went on in exhibition buildings
and train-sheds and also in factories and office buildings, where
much light and a cellular structure were demanded, the
architect continued to keep away from the new materials and to
be satisfied with the trappings of Gothic, Renaissance and —
more and more — Baroque. Neither the aesthetic possibilities of
defeating the limitation of past styles by means of the new
possibilities of skeletal construction nor the social possibilities
of mass-produced parts were taken seriously by the profession.

The great impetus in the fields of aesthetic and social renewal
came from England and centres in the larger-than-life figure of
William Morris, poet, pamphleteer, reformer, designer —
trained a little at university, a little in architecture, a little in
painting —and ending by being a manufacturer and shopkeeper,
though a very special one. Morris’s firm was started in 1861, in
collaboration with his close friends, the architect Philip Webb
and the painters Ford Madox Brown, Rossetti and Burne-Jones.
Morris’s theories, as he lived them from when he was twenty-
five and as he expounded them in impetuous lectures from when
he was over forty, are familiar. They derive from Ruskin who
had hated the Crystal Palace, had gone out of his way to say
that a railway station could never be architecture and denied
with frantic fanaticism the necessity for his age to search for a
style of its own: ‘A day never passes without our . . . architects
being called upon to be original and to invent a new style... We |
want no new style of architecture . . . It does not matter one
marble splinter whether we have an old or new architecture . . . }
The forms of architecture already known to us are good enough
for us, and far better than any of us’.25 Morris was wiser. He
refuted the current historicism, the ‘masquerading in other
people’s cast-off clothes’,26 but he too recommended architects
to ‘study the ancient work directly and to learn to understand
it’.2? He was nota revolutionary; he loved the Middle Ages and
loved nature and the open country, and he hated the big cities.
His hatred was visual at first, but turned social almost at once.

7 The Hall des Machines, built for the Paris Exhibition of 1889. It was primaril
the work of engineers, led by V. Contamin, though assisted in the details by th
architect Dutert - a pattern that was to become characteristic in the future

London to him was not only ‘a whole county covered with
hideous hovels’,?8 but also a ‘beastly congregation of smoke-
dried swindlers and their slaves’.29 The Middle Ages were not
only pleasing to his eyes, they were also — as they had been to
Ruskin — right in their social structure, or what he believed to
have been their social structure. In the Middle Ages, he said,
art was not ‘divided among great men, lesser men, and little
men’,?° artists were not, as they are now, ‘highly cultivated
men whose education enables them, in the contemplation of the
past glories of the world, to shut out from their view the every-
day squalors that most of men live in’.4! Artists were plain
workmen, ‘common fellows’ who worked away ‘on the anvil’
or ‘about the oak beam’ with ‘many a grin of pleasure’.32 The
things which are museum pieces now ‘were common things in
their own day’.33 And the reason why that was so, is that in the
Middle Ages ‘daily labour was sweetened by the daily creation
of Art’.34 And so Morris arrived at his definition of art as ‘the
expression by man of his pleasure in labour’.35 He arrived art the
demand that art should become this again: ‘a happiness for the
maker and the user.’ For while the average man can have no
interest in the self-conscious isolated artist, he can enjoy what
the craftsman does for him. So art should be not only ‘by the
people’ but also ‘for the people’.°¢ ‘I do not want art for a few,
any more than I want education for a few, or freedom for a
few.’37

It is a strange system of theory to be guided by for a man in
the mid-nineteenth century. It can only be understood as a
demonstration of opposition to the standard and the taste of
design as it was exhibited at the Great Exhibition of London in
1851, Paris in 1855, London again in 1862 and Paris again in
1867.

Looking at the goods, especially the domestic goods, illus-
trated in the catalogues of these exhibitions, one can understand
Morris's outbursts. In the Middle Ages ‘everything which was
made by man’s hand was more or less beautiful,’ today ‘almost
all wares that are made by civilized man are shabbily and

20

pretentiously ugly.’38 What is offered and sold is ‘hurtful to the
buyer, more hureful to the seller, if he only knew'.3% Our
houses are filled with ‘tons upon tons of unutterable rubbish’,
and the only acceptable things are usually in the kitchen.4° The
reason is that they alone are honest and simple, and ‘the
two virtues most needed in modern life (arc) honesty and
simplicity’.41 Morris maintained that a bonfire ought to have
been made of nine-tenths of all that was in wealthy people’s
houses. 42

Morris in his own day was no doubt right in blaming
industry. ‘As a condition of life, production by machinery is
altogether an evil.’43 But if you refuse to accept the machine,
you cannot produce cheaply. What Morris’s firm made was
bound to be expensive, and could not be ‘for the people’. Nor
was it strictly speaking ‘by the people’; for Morris and his
friends designed their chintzes and wallpapers, their furniture
and stained glass, and while it was made, admittedly, by hand
(though not always), it was not really creative craft. Yet, in spite
of such inconsistencies, Morris succeeded in what he had set out
to achieve. He made young painters and architects*in all
countries turn to craft or design; that is, he directed them to-
wards helping people in their everyday lives.

Why he succeeded, where Henry Cole and his friends had not,
is easily seen. For one thing he practised (up to a point) what he
preached. He was a fanatical craftsman himself, trying his hand
at wood-carving and illumination as early as 1856, and furnish-
ing his first rooms in London with Morris-designed and
carpenter-made ‘intensely medieval furniture . . . as firm and as
heavy as a rock’.44 Two years later he got married, and a year
after, iri 1860, he moved into Red House, a house at Bexley
Heath outside London, designed for him by his friend Philip
Webb and furnished to Webb’s and Morris’s own designs. The
house was daring in many ways, in exposing its red brick with-
out a coat of stucco, in planning from inside out, that is, with
secondary consideration of fagades, and in frankly showing the
construction inside.

Such a detail as the fireplace is of a truly revolutionary
character, completely devoid of any period allusions and
completely functional in displaying its brick courseshorizontally
where the logs are laid and vertically where the smoke goes up.
It is an exception in its own day and more prophetic of the
coming twentieth century than anything in the field of domestic
design in any country for thirty years to come. Most of the
firm’s early furniture is much more backward-looking, though
to the simplicity of the cottage and never to the displays of the
rich man’s house. Yet even among the furniture sold by the firm,
one can find occasional pieces of remarkably independent
design. A chair designed by the Pre-Raphaelite painter Ford
Madox Brown about 1860, for instance, though also clearly a
simple cottage chair, shows originality in the slender elongation
of the rails of the back.

Simplicity and directness unite this chair, Webb’s fireplace,
and the very fine designs in the flat of Morris and his firm, such
as his famous Daisy wallpaper designed in 1862 and Webb’s

8 Red House, Bexleyheath, Kent,
which was designed by Philip Webb
m_ 1859 for his friend William
Morris, was comfortable, domestic,
and very free in its handling of
period precedent. In some details,
like this fireplace, Webb shows an
originality that looks forward to
Voysey or Lutyens

9 Under the influence of Morris's
ideas furniture designers went back
to the simplicity of the English
cottage, and revived several
traditional types from the country.
This chair by Ford Madox Brown
of about 1860, with its straight lines
and rush scat, antedates the
foundation of the Morris firm


10 The firm of Morris and Co. exerted a decisive influence on almost every
aspect of design and interior decoration; it produced these tiles designed by
Philip Webb in 1862, for a fireplace in Norman Shaw’s Old Swan House
(see Ill, 17)

Swan tiles designed in the same year. It was the absence of
simplicity and directness from the goods one could buy in the
existing shops and stores which led to the creation of the firm.
And there again Morris directed development both as a
craftsman and a designer. When he decided that the firm should
turn to the printing of textiles, and saw that bad dyeing was
one of the chief troubles, he learned to dye for himself. And
later, when the firm turned to tapestry weaving, he spent 516
hours in four months at the loom. But Morris’s success was not

t1 Lily, machine-woven Kidderminster carpeting, by William Morris, 18

4

13 Silk damask designed by Owen
Jones, a friend of Henry Cole and
supporter of the Great Exhibition:
the Cole circle, even before Morris,
reacted against the florid photo-
graphic naturalism of High
Victorian designs, and produced
flat patterns for flat surfaces

only grounded in the example of craftsmanship he set, it was
even more due to his genius as a designer. The designs of the
Cole circle are dry and doctrinaire, Morris’s are brimful of life.
That is one memorable thing about them; the others are these.
His designs are always crisp. There is no ‘slobbering and messing
about’ in them.4> Secondly, he succeeded better than anyone
before or after him in achieving a balance between nature and
style, between the flatness recommended for textiles, etc., by
Pugin and the Cole circle, and the richness and abundance of
flower and leaf as he had studied it so well in his childhood and
youth. Moreover, his designs — in terms of design, not of
imitation — possess the equivalent of the closeness and density of
nature observed. Finally —and this matters most in our particular
context — the designs, especially those of before 1876, are not
in any way closely dependent on the past. They may be
inspired to a certain extent by Elizabethan and Jacobean
embroidery, but they are essentially original.

An example of Morris’s own design - a chinz (Tulip, 1875) that shows the
liness and crispness of Morris at his best

Just as Morris knew that to re-establish values in the things of
one’s everyday use was a matter of social conscience before it
could ever become a matter of design, so he also knew — and
in this he proved just as much a prophet — that the revival of
sound architecture must precede the revival of sound design.
‘Unless you are resolved’, he said in 1880, ‘to have good and
rational architecture, it is... useless your thinking about art at
all.’46 ‘The great architect’ of his own day, he knew, lived a life
carefully ‘guarded from the common troubles of common
men’.47 What he was referring to here is the fact that the leading
architects of the nineteenth century spent their lucrative
working hours designing churches, public buildings and
country houses and villas for the rich. This attitude changed
only gradually, and it will be one of our tasks in this book to
watch the change. Its first stage is what became known as the

14 Norman Shaw’s country houses may be compared with those of Philip
Webb. Banstead, Surrey, of 1884, shows the same sensibly informal
planning, though the angular chimney-stack and the neatly placed windows
are more self-consciously urbane


15 A later house by Philip Webb: Standen near East Grinstead, Sussex, of
1892. Beginning as always from the requirement of comfort and con-
venience, Webb achieves a design combining sincerity and clegance

English Domestic Revival, a turn of some architects of Morris’s
generation to the domestic field, entirely or almost entirely,
and at the same time to a smaller scale and a greater delicacy of
detail.

The two most important names are that of Morris’s friend
Philip Webb and that of Richard Norman Shaw. We have
already met Webb more than once. An carly work of his
maturity is Joldwyns in Surrey of 1873. Its chief merits are a
combination of boldness and straightforwardness, a refusal to
do anything for show, and a great faith in local building
materials. Webb, like Morris, was not a revolutionary. He
loved old building in the country and used its methods and
motifs. He was never afraid of mixing styles and he relished
unexpected solecisms such as the long chimneys of Joldwyns,
or the far-projecting five gables in a row at Standen, a house of
1892.

16 Shaw was an almost
exact contemporary of
Morris and Webb. What
distinguishes him is his
sophisticated wit and his
willingness to play with
historical styles for amusing
effect. His New Zealand
Chambers, in the City of
London, 1872, uses motifs
from the seventeenth and
eighteenth century to create
an efficient, well-lit office
block

Shaw was a different character, more the artist, where Webb
was the builder, more fanciful and elegant and perhaps also
more sensitive. He, too, never departed far from the past, at
least in his individual motifs, and he too mixed them with
delight. The oversailing upper floors of Swan House, Chelsea,
of 1876, are in the tradition of timber-framed building. The
oriel windows on the first floor are a favourite English motif
of about 1675, the excessively slender windows above are
Queen Anne — but the delicate, even piquant ensemble is Shaw

30

17 Old Swan House,
Chelsea, by Shaw (1876).
Each of its elements can

be traced to a historical
source, but their combination
has an elegance that is
unmistakably Shaw’s

TOT a

and no one else and had a great deal of influence in England and
America. Shaw even introduced this novel idiom into the City
of London. New Zealand Chambers of 1872, unfortunately
destroyed in the Second World War, is just as dainty and
domestic. The oriel windows on the ground floor are specially
remarkable. There is no period motif here; they are simply
introduced to allow a maximum of daylight to enter the offices.
Shaw’s country houses are nearer Webb’s, although they also
can perhaps be called more lighthearted.

31

&

18 Bedford Park, near London — the first garden suburb. The earliest
houses of about 1875 were designed in a modest style that has influenced
domestic architecture ever since. Gardens were large and informal; old
trees were kept to give a pleasant rural feeling

There is one more respect in which Shaw’s work concerns us
here. At Bedford Park, not far from London, though at the
time still not engulfed in the town, he buile from 1875 the first
garden suburb ever. The idea was not his, but Jonathan Carr’s
who had acquired the site. However, Shaw made it come
to life, in terms of streets of modest houses and of old trees
preserved in the gardens and new trees planted in the streets.

32

Again the design of the houses is not specially original. Their
source is Tudor England and Stuart England, though again not
the England of the ‘prodigy houses’ but of the manor house of
the size of William Morris's own at Kelmscott in Oxfordshire.
Webb and Shaw had established the middle-class house as the
progressive architect’s chief preserve. Morris had re-established
the aesthetic importance of our closest everyday surroundings.
But neither he nor Webb nor Shaw had felt as strongly about
the necessity of an original style of the nineteenth century,
that is, about forms not taken over from the past, as Viollet-le-
Duc had done. It made little difference; for Viollet-le-Duc,
when it came to designing, was if anything more period-bound
than Webb and Shaw. No one in Europe could get away
entirely from historicism before the 1880s.

tg Kelmscott Manor, William Morris’s beloved house: the picturesque
and plain outline of such old houses, with wings added gradually through
the centuries, inspired English architects from Webb and Shaw onwards


21 W.G. Low House,
Bristol, Rhode Island,
by Stanford White
(1887, demolished). In
America architects
such as White and
Richardson were able
to break with historical
precedent even more
radically than Webb
and Shaw

20 (below) The F.L.
Ames Memorial Gate
Lodge at North Easton,
Mass., by H.H.
Richardson (1880-1),
in his favourite massive
stonework

And Europe does in fact not cover the world situation any
longer at this juncture. The defeat of historicism was the work
of Americans as much as Europeans, though their front of
attack was significantly broader than that of the English. In the
field of the private house, H.H. Richardson and Stanford White
of McKim, Mead and White showed as much fresh enterprise
as Shaw, though admittedly not without knowing of his earlier
houses. Occasionally, as in the house for W.G. Low at Bristol,
Rhode Island, of 1887, which has been foolishly allowed to
disappear, White displayed a radicalism beyond Shaw’s and
explicable no doubt by his pioneer background of building in
a young nation. The same radicalism was applied with even
greater independence in commercial architecture, It is here that
America about 1890 established international leadership.

35

The fact that America now reached this crucial moment is
one of the most memorable facts of the century. The United
States had been colonial in their reaction to European styles.
They had become provincial, that is, part of a common front
of progress, but an outlying part. Now all at once they left
everyone elsc behind. They did this in first developing the
skyscraper and then in finding a new style for it. In 1875 in
New York the Tribune Building by Hunt rose to 260 feet, in
1890 the Pulitzer (World) Building by Post to 375 feet.

These early skyscrapers are simply high houses, not even
especially characterized as office buildings. It would have been
possible to characterize them so; for English office buildings had
evolved a style as early as the 1840s in which the facade was
reduced to a grid of stone piers and large windows. Chicago, a

22 As early as the mid-
nineteenth century English
office buildings had evolved
a functional style in which
the wall was reduced to a
grid of verticals and
horizontals. This example at
Nos. 5-7 Aldermanbury,
London, by an unknown
architect, dated from about
1840

23 The Guaranty
Building, Buffalo (1895) -—
the masterpiece of Louis
Sullivan. In technique
and in its strong vertical
emphasis it points forward
to the twentieth century,
but its claborate and
complex ornament places
it still in the age of Art
Nouveau (see fil. 26)

a
|
Ld
7
ae
a
w
v


newer city than New York, and one in which traditions could
not possibly matter, took up this novel and logical treatment
and made it the standard of its skyscrapers. Moreover, Chicago
added of its own the equally logical and most far-reaching
innovation of applying the system of the iron frame, originally
a system used for factories, to the high office building. This was
first done by William Le Baron Jenney in the Home Insurance
Building in 1883-5. It was an untidy and fussy building, but
the tidying up was done only five or six years later by a few
more talented architects: Burnham & Root, Holabird & Roche
and Louis Sullivan. Holabird & Roche’s Tacoma Building
dates from 1887-9, Burnham & Root’s Monadnock Building
(not a frame structure) from 1889-91, Sullivan’s Wainwright
Building at St Louis from 189r. In the following years appear-
ances were rapidly even further purified. Holabird & Roche’s
classic moment is the Marquette Building of 1894, Sullivan’s
the Guaranty Building of 1895 at Buffalo.

The importance of the School of Chicago is threefold. The
job of the office building was here approached with a perfectly
open mind and the functionally best solution found. An un-
traditional building technique offered itself to fulfil the needs of
the job and was at once accepted. And it was now at last
architects who took the necessary action, and no longer
engineers or other outsiders. Sullivan in particular knew clearly
what he was doing. In his Ornament in Architecture, an article
of 1892, he had written: ‘It would be greatly for our aesthetic
good, if we should refrain entirely from the use of ornament for
a period of years, in order that our thought might concentrate...
upon the production of buildings . .. comely in the nude.’48 Yet
Sullivan himself loved ornament, though he used it externally
only in a few judiciously chosen places. It is a very personal
feathery foliage ornament, inspired partly by the Morris
Movement, but much freer, wilder and more entangled. It has
been called Art Nouveau or Proto-Art Nouveau, and whether
such a term is justifiable cannot be decided until Art Nouveau
has been closely examined.

24 The Marquette Building, Chicago, by Holabird & Roche. Here in 1894 the
steel frame is completely expressed around large, broad windows (those at the
bottom are already the ‘Chicago type’, see Ill. 182), che detailing is plain, and the

whole is so well planned it is still highly efficient today

25, 26 Cast-iron ornament by Louis Sullivan, (right) on the Guaranty Building
(1895, see Hl. 23) and (above) on the Carson Pirie Scott store (begun 1899, Ill. 182).
Ornament in architecture had a special importance for Sullivan, and his own, with
its tensions and exuberant curls, is strikingly original

This is in fact our task now; for Art Nouveau was the other
campaign to drive out historicism. Thisisits primary significance
in European design and architecture, whatever other delights
and aberrations it may harbour. Among the sources of modern
architecture and design it is still the most controversial. Today’s
architecture and design having taken a turn away from
rationalism and towards fancy, Art Nouveau has suddenly
become topical, and the very qualities of it which in this
narrative will appear historically most dubious are hailed.
Books and exhibitions have vied with each other to present its
fascination. All the more important must it be to attempt an
analysis — aesthetic as well as historical.

40

CHAPTER TWO

Art Nouveau

The term Art Nouveau comes from S. Bing’s shop in Paris
opened late in 1895, the corresponding German term Jugendstil
from a journal which began to appear in 1896. But the style is
older. Traditionally it is supposed to have started fully mature
in Victor Horta’s house, no. 6 rue Paul-Emile Janson in Brussels,
and that house was designed in 1892 and built in 1893. But it
marks no more than the transfer of the style from the small to
a larger scale and from design to architecture.

The incunabula of Art Nouveau belong to the years 1883-8.
They are the following. Arthur H. Mackmurdo, wealthy
young architect and designer, in 1883 wrote a book on Sir
Christopher Wren’s churches in the City of London — not a
subject that seems to call for Art Nouveau — and gave it a title-
page fully Art Nouveau. What justifies this statement? The
area inside the frame is filled by a non-repcating, asymmetrical
pattern of tulips, stylized vigorously into flaming shapes. To
the left and right sharply cut short by the frame are two
cockerels, pulled out to an excessive thinness and length. The
characteristics which we shall see recur whenever we speak of
Art Nouveau are the asymmetrical flaming shape derived from
nature, and handled with a certain wilfulness or bravado, and
the refusal to accept any tics with the past. Of course Mack-
murdo’s design is not without ancestors, but they are not to be
found among the hallowed period styles.

He must have looked at Morris and, like Morris, at the Pre-
Raphaelites. He must have known William Blake, as the
Pre-Raphaelites did, but he was also familiar — socially too -
with Whistler, and although Whistler was an Impressionist in
his formative years, he soon found an aim of his own, the aim to
blend the light, soft, hazy tones of Impressionism with the

43

29 Three trends after 1860: (top right)
seeming naturalism pleasantly formalized
in the signet of Morris and Co. (c. 1861);
(bottom right) sinuous elegance in Mack-
murdo’s signet for the Century Guild,
incorporating its initials CG (1884);
(above) Japanese stylization in Whistler’s
calligraphic Butterfly signature

28 (left) The Peacock Room, 1876-7:
lavish decoration by Whistler in blue and
gold ‘Japonaiserie’ of a room designed by
Thomas Jeckyll for the shipping magnate
F.R. Leyland’s collection of porcelain

creation of piquant decorative patterns, sometimes almost
abstract, sometimes linear as in the celebrated Peacock Room of
1876-7. His equally celebrated signet, the butterfly, is an
example of his genius for witty stylization. Companions are
Morris’s early signet of his firm and Mackmurdo’s of the
Century Guild which he started in 1882. The three signets sum
up a story of nature and abstraction in which Morris, Whistler
and Mackmurdo are of equal importance. It need hardly be
added that the idea of calling a firm a guild was a bow to the
Ruskin and Morris circle. It was to convey connotations of the
Middle Ages and of cooperation instead of exploitation or

45

.

i

Hl

= . _ 30 Title page of the
HOBBY HORSE Hobby Horse, designed
PUBLISHED BY : by Selwyn Image in
B GALLEN. SUNNYSIDE.ORPINGTO 1884. Printed on
: ‘ . hand-made paper in
a carefully chosen
traditional typeface,
it heralded a style of
book-design lasting
well into this century.
“Never before’, said
The Studio, ‘had
modern printing been
treated as a serious

art.

competition. Mackmurdo’s guild brought out a journal the
Hobby Horse, and the title-page and typography of this also are
worth remembering. It preceded by six years Morris’s more
famous venture into typography and book-making, the
Kelmscott Press. Mackmurdo designed textiles for his guild in
1884 too, and they possess much of the originality and the
swagger of the Wren title. It is difficult to assess the effects of the
Century Guild. The eighties were the years of Morris’s wide
success as a designer. His by then much more staid, symmetrical,
as it were, classic designs for textiles were the principal influence
in England. But Mackmurdo’s daring also found an echo here
and there. Heywood Sumner, who was indeed for a while

46

associated with the Guild, worked in its style. The cover of the
translation of Fouqué’s Undine (1888) is a masterpiece in its own
right. The world of sprites or fairics of the water was bound to
appeal to Art Nouveau sensibility. Hair and waves and sca-
weeds were as alluring as such elemental creatures themselves,
not guided by reason but by instinct. For order enforced by
intellect is one of the things against which Art Nouveau was in
opposition, and the conscious selection of styles of the past to be
imitated represented that principle of enforced order.

31 Cover of Fouqué’s Undine by Heywood Sumner, 1888

Mackmurdo’s exploration was one in two dimensions, as
indeed Morris’s had been. But efforts at breaking the shackles of
historicism in the crafts, expressing themselves in the shaping
not the decorating of objects, were not entirely lacking either.
Pride of place here goes to France. Emile Gallé of Nancy was
five years older than Mackmurdo. His glass vessels of 1884 and
after are as alien to nineteenth-century conventions as Mack-
murdo’s book and textile designs, with their soft, subtle colours
and the mystery of their naturalistically-represented flowers
emerging out of cloudy grounds. Nor was Gallé alone, even in
these earliest years. Eugéne Rousseau, for instance, a much older
craftsman in Paris of whom coo little is known, turned to anew
style at the same time. The Musée des Arts Décoratifs bought
certain pieces from him in 1885, and among them is a jardini¢re
in imitation of jade and a tall vase of clear glass, both strikingly
independent and courageous. The scratched-in pattern of the
tall vase is particularly bold — Klee rather than Morris.

50

37 Crackleware goblet by Ernest Baptiste Leveillé (c. 1889); marbled with
colour both inside and out, and only about 6 inches high

E. B. Leveillé, a pupil of Rousseau, showed glass at the Paris
Exhibition of 1889, wholly in the same spirit, for instance a vase
of craquelé glass marbled in green and red. In ceramics there is
only one parallel to Rousseau, and that takes us to the most
influential of all outsiders, to Gauguin.

§2

39 The only leading painter to
experiment with crafts at this
time was Gauguin: he carved
and painted this wooden panel
in 188t for a cupboard in his
own dining-room

40 Gauguin also
designed a ceramic
centrepiece for a table,
in the form ofa girl
bathing in a pool 1888

54

41 A pitcher by Gauguin,
baked and enamelled in 1886
by Chaplet

Gauguin is the only one of the leading painters who not only
influenced design by his forms but experimented with crafts
himself. In 1881, before he had given up his job at the bank to
devote himself to art, he decorated a cupboard in his dining-
room with carved wooden panels in decidedly exotic shapes
and painted red, green, yellow and brown. Primitivism starts
from here, anda primitivism very different from Philip Webb’s.
Webb went back to the English countryside, Gauguin already
here to barbarity. Then, in 1886 he turned to pottery. The jug
here illustrated is as original and as ruthlessly crude. The épergne
with the bathing girl of 1888 isa little less uncompromising. In
fact, the introduction of the female figure into objects for use
was both in the nineteenth-ceneury tradition and to the liking
of Art Nouveau.

ws
as

43 Gauguin’s
Aux Roches
Noires of 1889,
from the cata-
logue of an
exhibition of
impressionist and
synthetic painting
at the Café
Volpini in Paris

Where Gauguin comes closest to the Mackmurdo-Sumner
endeavours is in his work in two dimensions, that is, as a
painter and a graphic artist. The catalogue title-page for the
Café Volpini exhibition of 1889 is violently primitive again, a
painting such as the Man with the Axe has the vermiculating
lines which became a hall-mark of Art Nouveau. Their influence
was brief but wide, and not only on painters such as Munch.
Gauguin conveyed his concern with craft as well as his style to

Dopuicat

44 The serpen-
tire line of the
water ripples in
Gauguin’s Man
with the Axe
(left), painted in
Tahiai in 1891,
reappear in Henri
van de Velde’s
title-page design
for Dominical, of
1892


his friends of Pont-Aven, and so we find Emile Bernard in 1888
doing wood-carving as well as an appliqué wall-hanging, and
J.F. Willumsen in 1890 turning to ceramics very much of the
Gauguin kind. Willumsen stayed in France and then returned
to Denmark. There, however, while he had been away, a
parallel development had begun in ceramics, independent, it
seems of Pont-Aven. Thorvald Bindesbgll, two years older than
Gauguin, and an architect by training, the son in fact of the
most original Janish architect of the nco-Greek movement,

45 Among Gauguin’s friends at Pont-Aven many were roused by his
example to take up crafts. The Danish painter Jens Ferdinand Willumsen
produced this vase in the form of a mother, father and baby (1890)


had in the 1880s begun to work in ceramics. The plate of 1891
with its crudely drawn tulips asymmetrically and indeed casually
arranged still links up with Gauguin and Art Nouveau; his later
plates stand entirely on their own in the whole of Europe. One
is tempted to see in them a parallel to the Kandinsky moment in
art; but they antedate it by nearly twenty years. One might also
-and more justly -— look in the direction of Gaudi, but even then
Bindesbgll seems to retain priority. Bindesbgll’s impact
remains, and what ties him into our particular context here, is
the attitude of the architect turning potter and indeed craftsman
in general.

47 The Dane Thorvald Bindesb¢ll became the most original ceramic
artist of his generation. The dish, of 1891, is still Art Nouveau in its twisting
lines, naturalistic tulips and asymmetry, though there are influences from
the East


49 The greatest
English master of
Art Nouveau
sculpture was Alfred
Gilbert; on the base
of the ‘Eros’
fountain in
Piccadilly Circus
(1892) he freely
indulged his taste
for writhing,
marine, slightly
sinister forms

No radicalism of Bindesbgll’s force can be found anywhere
else. The nearest to it in England is certain half-concealed
elements in the highly successful monuments of Alfred Gilbert.
Gilbert wasa sculptor in metals, precious metals on a small scale,
bronze in his large works, monuments as a rule. Their figures
are embedded in a gristly, crustaceous substance, some of it
seemingly in a heavy flow like lava, some arrested in grotesque
shapes. There was only one man in another country as ready
and perhaps readier to force metal into such violent expression:
Antoni Gauds, whom we shall mect more prominently soon.
The material of his first challenges was iron. His father was a
coppersmith; and he grew up day in day out seeing metal
molten and shaped. Inspiration to experiment with iron for

62

51 Wrought-iron grille of Gaudf’s early Casa Vicens, ¢. 1880, based on
palm fronds; the son of a coppersmith, Gaudi used metalwork lavishly

decorative purposes will also have come from Viollet-le-Duc’s
Entretiens, which show in the details of spandrels between iron
arches how medievalizing foliage trails can be made of iron.
Gaudi’s first house, the Casa Vicens at Barcelona, of 1878-80, is
medievalizing too, though in a fantastical semi-Moorish way,
and fantastical also are the spiky palm-fronds or stars of the iron
fence. In the Palau Giiell of 1885-9, his first major job, the
forms are less aggressive and more ingratiating, and the
parabolic shape of the portal is as unexpected and free from
references to the past as are the undulations of the iron. The ease
of bending wrought iron and its ductility, which allow for
the most delicate stalk-like filaments, made iron a favourite
material of Art Nouveau.

64

It came into its own at once with Horta’s house of 1892-3
already referred to (p. 43). The famous staircase of no. 6 rue
Paul-Emile Janson has a slender iron column left exposed, an
iron handrail of thin tendril-like curves, and in addition, not of

§2 Detail from Viollet-le-Duc’s Entretiens (1872), demonstrating cast-iron
construction and the use of iron foliage in a spandrel

ig K
mom J,

ool

PTTL PTET ine

ip.

oN —

AT

Peet ce


iron, applied wall, floor and ceiling decoration of the same
curves. One can hardly believe that this could have been
designed without influence from the England of Mackmurdo.
Indirect influence from Pont-Aven is more easily proved, as we
shall see presently. Although we are dealing with architecture
here, the job on the staircase was essentially one of decorating,
like Gaudi’s at the entrance to the Palau Giiell. We are not
sufficiently prepared yet for the architecture proper of both
buildings and their designers.

Art Nouveau is indeed very largely a matter of decoration —
so much so that some have denied its validity as an architectural
style — and it is furthermore largely a matter of surface decora-
tion. We must now follow it through the years of its conquest
and international success — a short-lived success; for it began
about 1893, and it was faced with a formidable opposition from
about 1900 onwards. After 1905 it held out only in a few
countries, and mostly in commercial work in which no creative
impetus was left, if there ever had been any.

33 The Angels’ Watch by the Belgian designer Henri van de Velde (1891),
no doubt inspired by the Pont-Aven group. This is the essence of Art
Nouveau — a recognizable subject, but every outline reduced to undulation


$4 Obrist’s embroidery Whiplash (1892-4), like an exotic botanical plate,
shows one plant’s leaves, bud, flower and root. Obrist had studied botany,
and looked to art to ‘glorify nature never seen all now, its powerful life and
gigantic divine forces’

As textiles and the art of the book initiated the movement,
they may be considered first. Henri van de Velde, Belgian
painter, influenced by the pointillistes and by Gauguin, turned
to design about 1890, the first such case of conversion by Morris
that we can watch closely. The tapestry, or rather appliqué wall
hanging, called Angels’ Watch, of 1891, can only be understood
as an echo of the work of Bernard. Ic interests us because the
disposition of the forms and the all-pervading undulations make
it so thoroughly Art Nouveau. The trees are stylized more
rigorously than the figures. A year or two later Hermann Obrist
did that curious piece of embroidery which is inspired by flowers
with their root. It is a tour de force, and if one compares it with

67

55 ‘It was as if spring had come all of a sudden,’ said van de Velde when he
first saw designs by Voysey. Water-Snake is an exuberant design of about
1890, Voysey is in the line of Morris and Mackmurdo, but Art Nouveau
transforms his early designs into something quite distinct

the best work in the field of textiles in England during the same
years, the work of Charles F. Annesley Voysey, a first impres-
sion is obtained of the restraint and the sanity of England during
those years. Excesses of Art Nouveau are all but absent. One
exception to this rule has already been named: Alfred Gilbert;
the other — Scottish and not English — will be commented on
later. Voysey’s textiles of about 1890 are clearly influenced by
Mackmurdo’s, but they are milder in their rhythms and a little
more accommodating. Less than ten years later Voysey was to
abandon this style altogether and turn to another, more original,
but less Art Nouveau.

68

In typography Belgium again held a key position. Les Vingt,
that adventurous club of artists whose exhibitions were perhaps
the most courageous in Europe — they had shown Gauguin in
1889, van Gogh in 1890, books and works of English artist-
craftsmen in 1892 — had as the title-page of its catalogue in 1891
a design by Georges Lemmen reflecting Gauguin at his most
Art Nouveau. The year after, van de Velde went into book
decoration. His title-page to Max Elskamp’s Dominical is
uncannily close to the Gauguin of the Man iwith the Axe, painted
in Tahiti the year before. Of 1896 are the initials made for
Van Nu en Straks, delightful play with the typical swelling and
tapering curves of Gauguin as well as the English book artists in
the Mackmurdo succession. Here again the contrast to the staid
splendour of the Kelmscott Press is great and can serve as a
reminder of how differently things were to go in England.
Germany joined in the new Belgian style after a few years’
hesitation. Otto Eckmann who died young in 1902 and Peter
Behrens who soon repented these wild oats were the leading
designers. Eckmann left painting for design in 1894, Behrens in
1895. Both designed type-faces of Art Nouveau character
about 1900 and also book decoration, printed matter for
business firms, book jackets, bindings and so on.

A remark on book-binding itself must be appended to these
remarks on the art of the book. The reason for picking out, as
one of the examples to be illustrated, a binding by the Nancy
craftsman René Wiener is that it introduces us to a different
aspect of Art Nouveau. The asymmetric and the curving, curly
shapes which were de rigueur could be obtained abstractly or
naturalistically. Van de Velde believed as fervently in the one,
as the artists of Nancy believed in the other. Neither was wholly
original. Henry Cole and his friends had preached the necessity
of ornament being ‘rather abstractive than . . . imitative’,4?
the Victorian decorators themselves in all countries had
wallowed in accurately portrayed roses, cabbage leaves and all
the rest. Now Gallé had an inscription above the door to his
studio which read: ‘Our roots are in the depths of the woods,
beside the springs, upon the mosses’, and wrote in an article:
‘The forms furnished by plants adapt themselves quite naturally

61 Bookbinding too was affected by the new ideas: one of its masters was
René Wiener of Nancy, who produced this portfolio for engravings —
decorated with vines and a press — designed and made by Camille Martin
in 1894


62 Binding by Wiener for Flaubert’s Salammbé (1893), with enamelled
corners by Camille Martin. Victor Prouvé, who did the leather-work,
designed it to suggest the contents of Flaubert’s novel, which he had long
admired: it shows Moloch, the moon-goddess Tanit, and Salammbé
writhing in the python’s embrace

to line-work.’5° Line is the operative word. In the mid-
nineteenth century, naturalism reigned in all fields; the natural
sciences were worshipped. Even ina church, otherwise imitated
accurately from the style of say the thirteenth century, the
foliage of the capitals was made yet more real than it had been
at any moment in the Middle Ages, and the leaves of native
trees and hedgerows were displayed proudly. Art Nouveau
designers went to nature because they were in need of forms to
express growth, not of human making, organic not crystalline
forms, sensuous not intellectual forms.

So much for Nancy ~ and of course others in other countries.
Van de Velde on the other hand insisted on the intellectual
process of converting nature to make it ornament. Ornament,
he said, must be ‘structural and dynamographic’. ‘The least
naturalistic association’ would menace the eternal values of

73

63 A necklace
{1900) also by
Lalique, is a filigree
design of hazel-nuts
and foliage in low
relief, with trans-
jucent enamels and
diamonds

ornament.5! Few were as radical as van de Velde, but as a matter
of principle, Voysey, for instance, agreed: ‘To go to nature is
of course to go to the fountain head, but . . . before a living
plant a man must go through an elaborate process of selection
and analysis. The natural forms have to be reduced to mere
symbols.’52 The future was with the abstractionists not the
naturalists, even if not the immediate future. For as soon as Art
Nouveau spread and became commercially exploitable, its
van de Velde version was too exacting, and the less pure
mixtures of curvaceous ornament with the curvaceous forms of
plants or indeed the female body, were certain of a greater
success.

The years of universal success, at least on the continent of
Europe, were the ending years of the nineteenth and the very
first years of the twentieth century. The catalogue of the Paris
Exhibition of 1900 is a mine of Art Nouveau. The necklace with
pendant by René Lalique was shown, and it illustrates, as do

74

65 (left) A brooch by Wilhelm Lucas von Cranach combines many
favourite Art Nouveau motifs — insects, sea-creatures, intertwining lines
and an atmosphere of corruption and menace — to show a butterfly strangled
by an octopus

66 (right) A broach by Lalique (1894) in the form of a peacock, its enamelled
gold tail set with moonstones

Lalique’s pendant and brooch, the part played by nature and
the part by stylization in Art Nouveau. From Germany came
the brooch by Wilhelm Lucas von Cranach. It represents an
octopus strangling a butterfly, though it can just as well be seen
abstractly and is perhaps seen in that way to greater advantage.
It is an exquisite display of red, green and blue enamel with
baroque pearls and small precious and semi-precious stones. In
Lalique’s brooch the enamelled peacock’s neck rises out of
feathers of gold and moonstone. With jewellery we have
moved from Art Nouveau in two dimensions to Art Nouveau
in the round. There was no reason why the principle of eternal
undulations should not be applied to three dimensions. All
materials were indeed affected. In Victor Prouvé’s bronze bow]

67 Brown-glazed carthenware vase by Georges Hoenstchel of about 1901: the
creamy overglaze is allowed to drip down at random

Night of 1894 flowing hair takes the place of Mackmurdo’s
or Obrist’s stalks and leaves, Lalique’s feathers and Cranach’s
tentacles. Every time what tempted the craftsman were natural
elements lending themselves to Art Nouveau sinuosity.

Ceramics and especially glass were idcal media for Art
Nouveau. Georges Hoentschel’s dark brown earthenware vase
ofc. 1901 with the off-whites of its daringly accidental running-
down glaze is an example of the former; the brothers Daum’s
bottle-shaped vase of 1893 with crocuses at the bottom and the
glaze running down the high neck, and of course the famous
Favrile glass of Louis C. Tiffany are examples of the latter.
Tiffany also began as a painter. He turned to decorative and
stained glass, and in 1893 started a glass blowing department.
The swaying, exceedingly attenuated forms of his vases and
their subtle, never wholly calculated, shot colours made them a
pattern for Europe as well, and Kar] Koepping’s glass —- Koep-
ping again was a painter at first — is clearly in the first place
inspired by Tiffany’s.


68 (below feft) Bronze bowl
by Victor Prouvé (see Hl. 73):
Night, 1894. In the flowing
hair tiny figures are tossed as
if on waves of the sea

69-71 Glass was drawn into
the shapes of Art Nouveau.
Tiffany (below centre,a vase of
1900) made it iridescent; the
brothers Daum, in a purple
vase of 1893 called ‘Sorrow-
ing Autumn — Crocuses’
(below), combined crisply cut
flowers with flowing drips
of molten glass. Koepping’s
wine-glasses are flowers
(right), their bowls held be-
tween leaves on frail stems


Wood is a less tractable material, and much Art Nouveau
furniture suffers from the conflict between its nature and the
expressive desire of Art Nouveau. One way to avoid the conflict
was to confine the decoration to curves on flat surfaces. But as
a rule, and most dedicatedly in France, the material was forced
to obey the style. France, in fact, is the country which in the end
carried on longest in Art Nouveau. There were two centres:
Paris, of course, and Nancy. That a provincial capital should vie
with the national capital was an improbable thing to happen in
so metropolitan a civilization as that of the rising twentieth
century. However, the case is matched by that of Glasgow.
Nancy is the town of Gallé and of a group of other craftsmen-
manufacturers all at first affected by Gallé’s faith in nature as the
source of ornament. Louis Majorelle’s is the most familiar name
after Gallé’s. It is characteristic of the efforts needed to make
Art Nouveau furniture that he used to model his pieces in clay
before they were made of timber.

72 Simplicity and solidity: William Morris’s ideals, represented by his
own patterns and Philip Webb’s oak furniture (after 1858). The rush-
seated chairs (see also Ill. 9) were especially popular in the 1870s and after


73 Excess and artifice: dining-room of cedar by Eugéne Vallin for a client
at Nancy (1903-6). The leather panels, ceiling and sideboard carvings are by
Prouvé, the glass by Daum, and the copper chandelier by Vallin himself

Art Nouveau like the Baroque made claims to the Gesamt-
kunstwerk. Only rarely can one do justice to an individual piece
without knowing of its intended context. That alone debarred
it or should have debarred it from quantity production. With
the vandalism typical of sons against the generation of their
fathers, most of the Art Nouveau ensenibles have been destroyed.
It is lucky that the Musée de l’ Ecole de Nancy could reassemble,
even if not without alteration and reductions, a complete
dining-room by Eugéne Vallin. This was begun only in 1903,

81

74 Emile Gallé’s great Butterfly Bed of 1904, which again shows the
fashion for insects, was his last work. He watched its completion from an
invalid chair and died in the same year

at a moment when the other leading countries were already
moving away from Art Nouveau. In looking at this room and
trying it out as a place to live in, one can understand why. Such
violent expression tires one soon. Furniture ought to be a
background. Here we feel intruders. Also there is the constant
clash between function and form — table legs awkwardly lumpy
at the foot, doors and shelf recess of bosomy shape. And finally,
one may well worry about wood made to perform ceramic or
metallic curves.

Onc of the most daring cases is the music room by Alexandre
Charpentier, a sculptor before he became a decorator. The

82

music-stand illustrated is a pure example of the three-
dimensional Art Nouveau curve, spatially ingenious and
functionally dubious. Charpentier belonged to the Parisian
group Les Cinq, soon (by the accession of Plumcet) to become
Les Six. They formed one centre of the crafts revival in Paris,
the other was Bing’s shop L’ Art Nouveau, a more international
centre of course. Among the designers specially connected with
Bing, Eugéne Gaillard in his later work showed one French way
out of the impasse of Art Nouveau. He said already in 1906 that
furniture should expressits function, thatitshould bein harmony
with the material and that curves should be used decoratively
only. His furniture is indeed a return to the principles and forms
of the most refined French cighteenth-century furniture, even
if he never stooped to imitation.

75 (left) Louis Majorclle modelled his furniture in clay, and the freedom
thus obtained is evident in his table (1902) of mahogany, tamarind and
gilded bronze

76 (right) Alexandre Charpentier went further still in this swirling music-
stand of hornbeam, part of an ensemble of 1901. Both designs would be
more suitable for metal or plastic


After these French pieces van de Velde’s great desk of 1896
is impressive in its radicalism and its tautness. There is neither
the elephantine massiveness of Vallin’s dining room nor
Gaillard’s half-concealed sympathy with the classic past. Van
de Velde impressed Germany much when he first showed in
1897. Indeed Germany started a little later than Belgium and
France, but for a short time men of strong personality joined
Art Nouveau and produced outstanding work. Otto Eckmann,
better known as a typographer and decorator of books, designed
furniture for the Grand Duke of Hessen about 1898, surprisingly
structural, considering his free use of natural forms in the books
he decorated. The solution of the seeming contradiction must
be van de Velde. Richard Riemerschmid’s chairs are more
English in their inspiration, and he was indeed among those who,
when he turned away from Art Nouveau, did so for social as
well as aesthetic reasons. The greatest ornamental originality in

77 The more chaste furniture of Eugéne Gaillard, such as this rosewood
canapé of 1911, paraphrases classic French furniture in Art Nouveau
language


Germany was August Endell’s, as we shall see in another context
later. What is known of his furniture has a curious plastic
quality — plastic in the true English sense of the word — quite
different from anything so far examined. The scrolls at the ends
of the arms of the chair illustrated are particularly convincing,
both aesthetically and functionally.

Only one other designer of furniture did likewise, and he was
neither German nor French nor English, nor indeed a furniture
designer. Antoni Gaudf’s chairs for the Casa Calvet of 1896-1904
have the same qualities as Endell’s but driven to an extreme.
They are Art Nouveau in that they shun the straight line, shun
all relation to the past and also in that they are fanatically
personal. The bone-like formation of the elements is all Gaudf’s.
His most surprising furniture is that for the chapel of the
Colonia Giiell at Santa Coloma de Cervellé on which he worked
from 1898 till 1914. Here is one of the few cases of design trying
to do what painting was doing at the same moment, that is,
scrapping all the agreed conventions of art. The brutality of


85 Porch of the crypt of Sta Coloma de Cervellé, by Gaudi (1898-1914).
The materials are rough stone, brick, cement, columnar basalt (pillar on the
left), and tiles laid edge to edge in the vaults. Details were devised on the
spot rather than at the drawing-board

the iron undercarriage of these benches, especially the feet,
and of the seats themselves, goes indeed beyond Art Nouveau.

Gaudi’s architecture poses even more urgently the problem
of how far Art Nouveau as a term with an analysable, useful
meaning can be stretched. That he is first and foremost Gaudi
there can be no question. The ironwork of the Casa Vicens
and the portal of the Palau Giiell have already demonstrated
that. But that his views and those of Art Nouveau coincided in
many ways is patent.

However, there is a greater problem involved here. It has
been denied by more than one scholar that Art Nouveau

88

"We sree’ 1

_Etuira

architecture exists at all. It has been argued that Art Nouveau
was no more than a decorative fashion, lasting hardly more
than ten years and hence not deserving the attention it has
recently been given. None of these contentions can be main-
tained. It might be worth looking at a number of exteriors and
interiors of buildings in a systematic order culminating in
Gaudi. The best start is Endell’s Atelicr Elvira in Munich,
unfortunately not preserved. A flat facade is made Art Nouveau
primarily, it is true, by means of a huge abstract ornament of a
crustaccous kind, but surely not only by this. The asymmetrical
fenestration, the tops of the windows and doorway like looped-
up curtains and the glazing bars all play their part. And when
you entered the house, a stair hall received you in which all
the forms undulated, and not only those applied to the walls.

gt

93 Horta’s own house, in
the rue Américaine,
Brussels (1898-9): iron
supports curl like tendrils
around the balconies, and
the pillars leaf out as in
his earlier stair (Jil, 88)

The handrail of the staircase, the newel post and light fitting
rocketing up from the post — all this is architectural, that is,
three-dimensional and articulating inner space. That the
famous and at the time publicized staircase in Horta’s house in
the rue Paul-Emile Janson was the pattern is evident, and that
staircase with its slender iron pillar also is genuinely architectural.
Admittedly exteriors were not often up to the novelties of the
interiors — as had been the case of the Atelier Elvira — but if one
looks at the facade of Horta’s own house of 1898-9, or the
former Hétel Solvay of 1895-1900, one sees again the same
spindliness of iron supports, the same play of pliable iron
decoration round them and the same sense of transparency as
inside.

94 Auditorium of Horta’s Maison du Peuple (designed in 1896 as a vast sc
centre): the iron framework is fully exposed, but softened by Horta’s genius
curving metalw

Altogether, the role of iron in Art Nouveau is interesting
enough to deserve a paragraph. Iron is a decorative as well asa
structural material. Viollet-le-Duc had recognized that and
suggested its use in both capacities in the same buildings. He
was the fountain head. Then, and independent of him, iron and
later steel, externally in conjunction with glass, became the
most technically suitable material for the factory, the warehouse
and the office building. The quality which recommended it was
that it lent itself to the unmitigated grid. This was an argument
in itself not of an aesthetic nature, though the twentieth century
discovered the aesthetic possibilities of the grid. Buc Art
Nouveau must retain the credit for the discovery of the aesthetic
possibilities of iron and glass — even if these qualities have
nothing to do with those of the grid. Art Nouveau adored
lightness, attenuation, transparency and of course sinuosity.
Iron meant thin members and ductility; iron and glass used
externally produced the same transparency obtained internally
by iron alone. Horta’s Maison du Peuple of 18y6-9 was the Art


Nouveau version of the American office building — both
dependent on iron, but in exactly opposite ways. In America
the steel controls structure and thereby appearance, though the
tacades are of stone cladding the steel; in the Maison du Peuple
the iron frame is visible, and iron provides the music playing
round the frame and embroidering on the eternal Art Nouveau
theme of the curve which also is that of the fagade as a whole.
The rhythm of iron, glass, steel and brick is restless and the
building does not read as a whole. In the great hall inside, iron is
exposed everywhere, and yet the effect is not utilitarian, largely
again thanks to the use of curving members. The most daringly
glazed commercial building of those years was Bernhard
Sehring’s Tictz Department Store in Berlin of 1898, which
consists of three broad stone bays, left, right and centre,
exuberantly Baroque and notat all Art Nouveau in their details,
and all the rest glass with the thinnest iron verticals and
horizontals.

95 Facade of the Maison du Peuple in Brussels, by Horta (1896-9, de-
molished in 1965-6), with curving walls of iron and glass between brick
panels


In France the architect with the keenest sense of the poten-
tialities of the new materials was Hector Guimard. It was a fine
show ofa sense of topicality that the Paris Métro allowed him
for the relatively new purpose of a metropolitan underpavement
railway to design exclusively in the new material. The general
tenor is indeed as light as befits the introduction to fast transport.
But the details are bossy and bony — more similar to Alfred
Gilbert’s of more than ten years before than to anyone else’s.
However, the refusal to entertain straight lines anywhere and
the sense of inventiveness all through place them firmly in Art
Nouveau. Guimard’s magnum opus, the Castel Béranger of
1897-8, on the other hand is in its fagades not Art Nouveau.


101-2 Two details from Gui-
mard’s Castel  Béranger:
(right) an eroded-looking sea-
horse shape of cast iron; and
{left) the glass-brick wall of
the staircase, set in an iron
frame, foreshadowing long
before Bruno Taut’s Glass
House (ili. 180) a favourite
motif of the twenties and
thirties

Its jumble of motifs is original, even forcedly so, but it is angular,
static, solid and conventional in many details. The ironwork of
the main doors on the other hand and the terracotta panels in
the entrance are Art Nouveau and the latter are, moreover,
most daring in their demonstration of pure abstraction. A
rarely-seen iron detail from the top of the house reminds one of
another architect who ventured into pure abstraction, Endell in
his Elvira ‘rocaille’. In fact even some of the dragon connota-
tions are the same. Yet more amazing historically is the wall of
the staircase at the back, a wall of heavy double-curved glass
panels of alternating shapes whose very irregularity of surface
does what in the terracotta panels had to be done by the
craftsman’s will.

Guimard’s delight in materials and unexpected effects to be
obtained from them and even some of Guimard’s forms are the

103

103 Plan of the ground floor of the Casa Mila by Gaudf, begun in 1905.
This remained flexible till the last, with partition walls inserted only after
the building was complete :

only causeway by which we can safely reach Gaudi. There are
few other communications, and his originality might indeed
not have become quite so extreme if it had not been for his
working in the comparative isolation of Barcelona and working
for a clientéle nationally disposed in favour of fantastical
architecture. Indeed the extremes of Plateresque and Chur-
rigueresque are hardly less bewildering than those of Gaudi.
These he must have known, but they do not seem to have
inspired him. On the other hand he must have been impressed
by the Mohammedan style of southern Spain as well as that of
folk building in Morocco. And he must also have seen in the
journals how Art Nouveau triumphed in France, and some of
the interior details in his two blocks of flats, the Casa Batllé and
the Casa Mild, are indeed entirely French Art Nouveau, just
as the use of concrete trees — leafless of course — in the Giiell Park
is a conceit of Hennebique’s, the French concrete fanatic. Still,
his overwhelming originality remains, but — at least in the Casa
Batllé and the Casa Mila, both late works, begun in 1905 — it is
an originality within the framework of Art Nouveau.

104 Detail of the facade of Gaudi’s Casa MilA, of dark, pitted stone ~ deliberately
wave-like, with seaweed balconies

What after all is it that startles one in these facades as one
comes upon them unprepared in the Paseo de Gracia? A whole
facade in a slow, sluggish and somewhat menacing flow — like
lava, some people have said; as if carved out by the sea, say
others; like the face of a long-disused quarry, yet others. So
here is undulation, and here is the affinity with nature
‘structurized’, as van de Velde once called it. Here also - and
this needs saying now at last — is that disregard for functional
advantages that did such disservice to Art Nouveau in buildings
and furnishings everywhere. Balcony railings which stab at you
and consistently curved walls against which no one’s furniture
will stand satisfactorily are only two examples. What elevates
these two late Gaudi buildings above those of other architects
of the same moment is their restless force, their sense of masses
in motion and their single-mindedness. The plan of the Casa
Mila to which reference has already been made is ultimate proof
that Art Nouveau principles could be applied to space as well as
line and volume.

The placing of Gaudi within European Art Nouveau is
relatively easy as long as one confines oneself to his work after
1903. But three years earlier he had started on the Giiell Park
and five years earlier on the chapel of Santa Coloma de Cervellé
on an industrial estate also belonging to his patron Eusebio
Giiell. In the chapel there are no undulating lines; all is sharp,
angular, aggressive. Butall is also in its own idiom as unexpected
as the houses in the Paseo de Gracia. If one looks for comparisons
one is reminded rather of German Expressionism of the 1920s —
in its wildest Dr Caligari dreams — than of Art Nouveau. As far
as Art Nouveau was opposition to the past and opposition to
the order of right-angles, Santa Coloma of course qualifies.
As far as Art Nouveau was a challenging show of individualism,
it also qualifies. And that is perhaps enough. The little building,
abandoned before it was completed, is in its interpenetration of
outer and inner spaces bolder than anything Frank Lloyd
Wright had done or was ever to do in pursuit of spatial
confluence. The walls are a seemingly arbitrary zigzag, though

to§ At the Casa Batllé (1905-7) Gaudi refaced an older building with colov
tiles, adding the rippling stone entrance and bay-windows and spiky, sini
iron balconies, and finishing with a steep roof of tiles grading from orang)

blue-gr

an axiality from entrance to altar is preserved. But the approach
is wholly asymmetrical, and even the round piers inside do not
correspond left with right. Morcover, supports are set at
raking angles, they are built up here of brick, there of stones;
they are roughly shaped or frankly shapeless, and they carry ribs
whose details seem to have been decided not at the office,
beforehand, but on the spot, as work went on.

This is indeed true of the very similar structures connected
with the Giiell Park as well. Here also you find twisted supports
set diagonally, fairly normal but leaning Doric columns,
stalactite vaults, quite apart from the dead trees of concrete, and
quite apart from the enchanting back of the long seat running
all along the open space at the top where nannies sit and children
play. This back, writhing and drooping like a serpent or some
antediluvian monster, is yet gay, by virtue of its delicious
colours, bright, happy colours, any number of them and in
haphazard relations. The seat is faced with faience and tiles, and
here as well as on the roofs of his houses and indeed on the
pinnacles of his great church, the Sagrada Familia, broken cups
and saucers, broken floor tiles and wall tiles and chips ofall kinds
are used. Again Gaudf is closer to Picasso there than to the other
practitioners of Art Nouveau.

The Sagrada Familia spans Gaudi’s whole life. He dedicated
his powers more and more to it and in the end to the exclusion
of anything else. For Gaudf was an unquestioning Catholic.
Religion was the centre of his life, and the aestheticism of much
of Art Nouveau experimenting is totally absent in him. In
1884 he was put in charge of a neo-Gothic building only just
begun. He continued it in that style and gradually turned freer
and bolder. As one looks at the great facade of the south transept,
one can watch the process of liberation. Below there are still
three tall gabled portals on the French Gothic cathedral pattern,
and it is only the decoration encrusting it that is transformed
into rockery and naturalistic leaf-work. The towers are without
precedent, but they were only started in 1903. And as for
the pinnacles, once again, it seems impossible to believe that

108

106 In the crypt of Santa Coloma de Cervellé, begun in 1898, Gaudi’s
delight in variety of planes, textures and materials is obvious; his enginecr-
ing instinct led him to the structurally efficient angles of walls and supports.
He also designed the benches (see Ill. 84) ,

they can be the work of craftsmen working from architect's
drawings.

Gaudf was not an architect in the sense in which the profession
had established itself in the nineteenth century and was going
to be run in the twenticth. He was not a professional man
working in an office. He was essentially stall the medieval
craftsman whose final decision could only be taken as he watched
over the execution of what he had perhaps sketched out on
paper but never made final. In him one ideal of William Morris
had come true. What he built was ‘by the people for the people’
and no doubt ‘ajoy for the maker’, i-¢., the actual mason, as well.

Hl.

107, 108 (following pages) The transept front of Gaudi’s Sagrada Familia was begun
about 1887 ina free paraphrase of Gothic, and ended, in the Qwenties, in fantastic
cubist pinnacles (right)

109 Gaudi’s Palau Giiell (1844-9), two arches with massive ironwork in
the Catalan tradition. Gaudi used parabolic arches — the shape of the future —
both decoratively and structurally

It is of importance to say this; for recently Gaudi has been
hailed as a pioneer of twentieth-century structure, a forerunner
of Nervi. But whereas, in the field of new shapes and materials
he points forward indeed, his use of complicated models to
experiment with strains and stresses is not that of the engineer-
architect of our age at all. On the contrary, it is still that of the
individualist-craftsman, the outsider, the lonely, do-it-yourself
inventor.

And in this extreme individualism once again Gaudi was
part of Art Nouveau. For Art Nouveau was an outbreak of
individualism first and foremost. It depended for success entirely
on the personal force and sensibility of a designer or craftsman.
What could be communicated of it, is what ruined it so quickly.
The style of Schinkel, the style of Semper, the style of Pearson,

112

the style of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts could be taught and used
with impunity by the rank and file. Commercialized van de
Velde and Tiffany is a disaster. Commercialized Gaudi was
hardly attempted. This individualism ties Art Nouveau to the
century at whose end it stands. So does its insistence on craft and
its antipathy against industry. So finally does its delight in the
precious or at least the telling material.

But Art Nouveau straddles the boundary line between the
two centuries, and its historical significance lies in those of its
innovations which pointed forward. They are, as has been said
in these pages more than once, its refusal to continue with the
historicism of the nineteenth century, its courage in trusting its
own inventiveness, and its concern with objects for use rather
than with paintings and statues.

110 Entrance to the Giiell Park, begun in 1yoo. The stairs, fanked by
pavilions, surrounded a serpent fountain; they lead to the Market Hall with
its Doric colonnade


CHAPTER THREE

New Impetus from England

It is in its concern with objects for use that Art Nouveau was
most decisively inspired by England. The message of William
Morris was heeded everywhere. In other ways the relations
between the English and the Continental developments of the
1890s are more complex. They deserve more than one close
look. The situation, it must be remembered, was that in the
1880s Morris’s art of design had reached its richest, most
balanced maturity. A synthesis between nature and stylization
was achieved which has never been outdone. At the same time
in architecture Webb and Shaw had, at any rate in the field of
domestic building, defeated Victorian pomposity and re-
introduced a human scale and sensitive or at least telling details.
And already before 1890 Morris as well as Shaw and Webb had
their successors. The Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society had
started and the progressive architectural journals had begun to
illustrate the designs of Voyscy, of Ernest Newton, Ricardo and
others. Meanwhile, however, this Arts and Crafts movement
had also benefited from those among the young who wanted to
go beyond the enlightened traditionalism of Morris and Shaw.
Mackmurdo, as we have seen, was their leader, and Mackmurdo
with his Wren title-page of 1883 had started Art Nouveau. The
effect of the journal of his Century Guild, the Hebby Horse, had
been great, and English book art right on to Beardsley was
indebted to it. But where Continental Art Nouveau of the 1890s
acknowledged this debt freely and developed its own national
versions out of English precedent, England itself turned away
from it and followed Morris and Shaw rather than Art Nouveau.

Indeed, and this is perhaps the most surprising aspect of
Mackmurdo’s situation, he himsclf, when it came to designing
buildings and furniture, did not apply the sinuosity of his book-

lis

work and textiles. The carly chair which some regard — without
sufficient evidence - as designed in 188153 has, apart from
ornament directly connected with that of the Wren title-page,
at least a curvaceous back, but the little desk of 1886 and the
exhibition stand at Liverpool of the same year are entirely
rational and rectangular. It is true they are in their own way as
original as the proto-Art Nouveau of a few years before, but
their originality is their slender square posts and the curious far-
projecting hats or pieces of cornice each of them carries.

112 In this chair,
designed in the carly
eighties, Mackmurdo
used a traditional
shape but with the
swirling plant forms
of his influential
title-page(see fl. 27)


113 By 1886 Mackmurdo had moved on to the equally revolutionary
angularity of the Century Guild exhibition stand: its thin vertical posts
and ‘mortar-board’ tops were soon taken up — via Voysey and Mackintosh
—as far away as Austria and Sweden

This motif in particular influenced Voysey and Mackintosh
in their beginnings, and Voysey was also strongly influenced by
Mackmurdo in his early textile designs. Charles F. Annesley
Voysey must be regarded as the central figure in English
architecture and design during the two decades around 1yo0.
His style of domestic architecture was complete by 18go. In
1891 he built a small studio house in West Kensington, London,
and there already are the low, comfortable, spreading character,
the bands of unmoulded window openings and of bare wall,
the big, tapering chimneystacks. There is no longer even as

117

114 Studio in West Kensington, London, by Voysey (1891), an exercise in
rational design devoid of ornament. Note the pebbledash rendering, broad
eaves and sloping buttresses — all Voysey trademarks

115,116 Voysey specialized in country houses; Broadleys on Lake Winder-
mere (right), of 1898, is remarkable for its plain bay windows with un-
moulded mullions. The entrance of Vodin House, Pyrford Common,

Surrey, of 1902 (below right), carries this simplicity even further
much of period details as there had been in Shaw and Webb,
but there remains all the same a strong period flavour, a flavour
of the Tudor or Stuart cottage or manor house. The house is in
its own way as original as Morris’s designs, but hardly more
original. In the late nineties and shortly after 1900 Voysey was
extremely successful as a designer of private houses of moderate
size, and for good reasons; for his plans are easy and at the same
time his houses fit their setting, and their simple geometry was
refreshing; they were eminently reasonable, unradical and
unexacting.

118

Others in England at the same moment were bolder, none
more so than E.S. Prior, W.R.Lethaby, and the much younger
Edwin Lutyens. Prior, more distinguished as a scholar than as
an architect, built a few houses between about 1895 and 1905
which combine Voysey’s sixteenth- or seventeenth-century
sympathy with a fanatical use of mixed local materials.
Occasionally the bits of brick and the pebbles used in the raw
are almost reminiscent of Gaudf. Lutyens was a man of brilliant
talents who later turned away from the progressive develop-
ments and led the retreat into the grand manner which Shaw
himself had started in his buildings after 1890. This neo-Baroque

117 Home Place, Norfolk, by E.S.Prior (1904-6). Prior tried hard to
revive local styles and local materials, preferring to be known as a ‘builder’
rather than an architect, but at Home Place his exotic mixture of flint, tile
and brick takes him far from any true vernacular — almost into the realm
of Gaudf


118 The early work of Edwin Lutyens has as much wit as Norman Shaw's
and a prodigious architectural inventiveness. Tigbourne Court, Surrey
(1897) is Lutyens at his best. Note the dramatic massing of the whole, the
relation of the three gables to the excessively high chimney-stacks, and
such details as the rusticated stonework with smooth banding

or neo-Classicism need not concern us here. It reigned in official
architecture nearly everywhere. Such public buildings as
Nyrop’s Town Hall at Copenhagen, begun in 1893, and
Berlage’s Exchange of Amsterdam of 1898 are highly excep-
tional in their free handling of traditional materials, and Nyrop
at least stayed on safer ground even than Voysey. Of Lutyens’
talents and his temptations into drama the finest show ts
Tigbourne Court of 1897.

At least as dramatic, but without any of Lutyens’ playfulness
is the church designed by W.R.Lethaby at Brockhampton
dating from 1900-2. Lethaby, after Morris the most con-
structive thinker on architecture and design in England, gave
up practising altogether after Brockhampton in order to teach
at the London Central School of Arts and Crafts which was the
most progressive school of those years anywhere. Lethaby in
his writings recommended the step from craft to industrial
design, a step which Voysey and others already had taken as
practising designers. But only Lethaby in England saw that
more was concerned than a matter of production techniques.

121 (left) Interior of All Saints,
Brockhampton-by-Ross,
Herefordshire, by W.R. Lethaby
(1900-2). The tunnel-vault, of a
shape more Expressionist than
Gothic, is of concrete. With an
ambivalence characteristic of the
Arts and Crafts, it is thatched on
the outside

122 Clock designed by C.F.A.
Voysey about 1906, of ebony
with ivory inlay. The openavork
crown is lined with yellow silk
and topped by a brass ball like
those it stands on


123-5 Anelegant simplicity of line characterized the best English products.
Voysey designed silver as chaste as his houses — above right, a teapot of ¢.
1896 — and Ashbee was famous also on the Continent for such pieces as this
silver dish (1899-1900, above left) with red-cnamelled cover; its stone-set
knob and ball feet are characteristic. Ernest Gimson designed beautifully-
made inlaid furniture: his cabinet and stand of 1908 (opposite), like the ball
feet of Ashbee’s dish, derives ultimately from the seventeenth century

Astyle for industria! design was visualized by Lethaby but it was
developed in practice in other countries. As far as the style is
concerned; it mattered little whether what Voysey designed
was in the end made by the craftsman or the manufacturer. The
style is moderate, sensible, always graceful, whether in furniture
or in textiles or in metalwork.

The same applies to other architects, designers and craftsmen.
A chair such as that made by Baillie Scott for the Grand Duke
of Hesse in 1898 is a good example, also in the design of the
covering of the back which has abandoned the Art Nouveau
way of Mackimurdo while keeping the sense of the pretty flat
pattern. Another example is the exquisite cabinets designed by
Ernest Gimson. They also are in no demonstrative way novel,
yet in no way imitative, and they are a triumph of revived
craftsmanship. However, the cabinet illustrated dates from 1908,
and by then, on the Continent, had lost all topicality. Gimson
was trained as an architect and designed a few houses before he
turned entirely to the crafts. The combination is characteristic

127

of Britain at that moment. On the Continent, in terms of Art
Nouveau, it was the painters rather who listened to Morris. In
Britain the message could be heard by the architects, because
already at the Webb-Shaw stage the alliance with the Morris
Movement had been established. One of the more interesting
cases is that of C. R. Ashbce who designed houses of considerable
originality, chough obviously inspired by Shaw, and founded a
Guild and School of Handicraft having learned the Morris
lesson. The school operated at first in the East End of London,
later at Chipping Campden in the Cotswolds; for Ashbee was
keenly interested in social reform too. It is worth comparing the
work of his craftsmen about 1900 with Continental work at the
Paris Exhibition. What appears is that in furniture and metal-
work for use Ashbee was entirely on the Voysey side, but in
jewellery he comes remarkably close to Art Nouveau - a
typically English compromise. .

126 Pendant by C.R, Ashbee,
about 1900, of gold and silver
enamelled and set with pale
semi-precious stones. Its rendering
of a peacock, above a characteristic
Art Nouveau drop, may be com-
pared with Lalique’s (Il, 66)


127 Silver pendant designed by Charles Rennie Mackintosh and made by
his wife Margaret Macdonald in tyo2. Itrepresents a fight of birds through
storm-clouds, with raindrops of pearls on thin silver wires

There was no compromise across the border in Scotland,
where, suddenly, at the beginning of the 1890s, a group of
architect-designers sprang up converting what they knew of
Voysey and others in England and of work on the Continent
too (for The Stidio kept readers up-to-date) into an idiom
entirely their own, as original and as radical as Art Nouveau,
but never so contorted. Or at least not when they had reached
maturity. The leader of the group was Charles Rennie
Mackintosh, eleven years younger than Voysey, seventeen
years younger than Mackmurdo. In addition there were his wite
and her sister — the sisters Macdonald - his brother-in-law

* [2y

MeNair, and a few others. The diploma document of Mackin-
tosh, datable to 1893, is contorted indeed. The nearest parallel
to these lean, sombre nudes is Toorop in Holland, and their
completely abstract bands of hair, their draperies and trees
reduced to one leaf (or fruit) on each upward growing branch
are entirely Mackintosh’s. In the next few years they did other
stationery, and the ladies did repoussé work as well. Then
Mackintosh’s great opportunity came. In 1896 he won the
competition for a new building for the Glasgow School of Art,
and the building was erected in 1897-1909. In 1897 The Studio
published an illustrated article on the group. In 1900 they
exhibited in Vienna, in 1902 in Turin. In 1901 Mackintosh went
in for a competition set by a German publisher — designing a
house for a lover of art. Glasgow was in fact destined to find
more resonance on the Continent than in England.

128 Mackintosh designed this diploma for the Glasgow School of Art Club
in 1893 — the year in which Toorop’s The Three Brides appeared in The
Studio, The influence is obvious, but Mackintosh’s sparseness and angularity
are already unmistakable. Note too the compressed Jettering


The front of the Glasgow School of Art sets the theme for all
that Mackintosh was to do in the next ten or twelve years.
Between 1900 and 191t he had plenty of work at Glasgow, a
number of private houses, a number of tea-roomis, a school, and
some interior work. England however remained closed to him,
and from about r9io his star waned. He was a fascinating but a
difficult, erratic man, and he alienated clients’ sympathies in the
dour city of Glasgow. For the last fifteen years of his life he had
hardly any commissions.

The front of the School of Art is primarily a wall of large
studio windows facing north. They have the English Tudor
motif of mullions and transoms, but the mullions and transoms
are, like those of Voysey, completely unmoulded. The front
would be a functional grid, ifit were not for the entrance bay or
frontispiece which is placed out of the centre and is a free,
asymmetrical composition of elements of the Baroque, of the
Scottish baronial past and of the Shaw-Voysey tradition. The
pediment on the first floor belongs to the first, the bare turret
to the second, the little oriel windows to the third. Moreover,
the functional grid and the sturdiness of the centre are relieved
by delightful, very thin metalwork, the area railings, the
handrail of the balcony and especially the odd hooks carrying
transparent, flower-like balls in front of the upper windows.
Their practical purpose is to hold boards for window-cleaning,
but their aesthetic purpose, like that of all the other metalwork
is to provide a delicate screen of light and playful forms through
which the stronger and sounder rest will be seen. Inside the
building too there are transparent screens of slender wooden
posts, sudden surprises of relations between forms, especially in
the boardroom, where pilasters are treated as an abstract grid
of a Mondrian kind below their perfectly harmless Ionic
capitals, and on the roof, where shapes are almost as bold and
abstract as Gaudi’s and Le Corbusier’s at Ronchamp, and there
are again the most unexpected curligigs of metal.

Once more only did Mackintosh design a building as func-
tional as the School of Art — the Concert Hall for the Glasgow

130 Entrance of the Glasgow School of Art, 1897-9, by Mackintosh. Above the
door is the window of the Director’s study, and above that his studio. The main
studios have vast iron-framed windows

ee

133-5 Mackintosh’s keen and completely modern sculptural sense appears
(above) in a wrought-iron lamp bracket over the stairs in the Glasgow
School of Art (1897-9), (right) in the bold roughcast forms of an arch on the
roof of the School of Art (c.1907), and (below right) in his revolutionary
and unrewarded design of 1898 for a circular concert hall with projecting
dressing-rooms etc.

Exhibition of 1901, designed in 1898. It was to be circular and to
hold over four thousand people. Mackintosh provided fora low
building with a saucer dome on mighty buttresses. The supports
were of iron, forming a span of about 165 feet. The organ, the
artists’ rooms and services were in an attachment with polygonal
walls and curved parapets and roof. The design gained no prize.

136

ee 2 ee ee

While the building was severely plain, the organ-case would
have had ail the finesses and surprises of Mackintosh’s furniture
design. What characterizes all Mackintosh furniture can be said
to bea successful synthesis of the contrasting criteria of England
and the Continent. Take, for example the two tables illustrated.
One is as square as a Voysey and indeed more rigidly so — as
close in its grid as a cage — the second is oval, with two small
oval set-in rose and ivory panels of abstract curves. Moreover,
the first table has a black finish, the second a glossy white one,
and white and rose, white and lilac, with black, and perhaps
silver and mother-of-pearl became Mackintosh’s favourite
colours. These sophisticated, precious colours harmonize to
perfection with the sophistication of his slender uprights and
shallow curves. But the radicalism of ornamental abstraction
and the lyrical softness of the colours also contradict each other,
and it is the tension between the sensuous and the structural
elements that makes Mackintosh’s decoration unique. But as
one looks at some of the most remarkable chairs by Mackintosh,
one’s conviction might well be shaken that his use of grids is
indeed structural — in the sense of the skyscraper grids. The hard
verticals and horizontals must have been an attraction to
Mackintosh in themselves, an aesthetic counterpoint to his
tense curves, and a safeguard that the frail blooms and feminine
hues do not cloy.

Mackintosh’s fame was greater on the Continent than in
Britain, let alone in England. The exhibition of rg00 in Vienna,
the competition of 1901 in Germany where he was placed
second — Baillie Scott won first prize — and the exhibition of
1902 in Turin have already been mentioned. What made it
possible for the Continent to admire him was precisely what
deprived him of patronage in England. He wastoo Art Nouveau,
and England, after the few years of her Art Nouveau avant la
lettre had, as we have seen, turned away from everything outré.
Indeed, when in 1900 some mostly French Art Nouveau
furniture had been acquired from the Paris exhibition by a
private donation for the Victoria and Albert Museum, protests

140

——

140 Joseph Olbrich’s exhibition hall for the Secession in Vienna, of 18g8:
aclean massing of geometrical shapes. The ‘dome’ of metal leaves ts echoed,
in Olbrich’s original drawing, by two equally round laurel bushes flanking
the door

were published in the press — one of them signed by E.S. Prior,
saying that ‘this work is neither right in principle nor does it
evince a proper regard for the material employed’.54 Those who
protested were of course right within their own terms of
reference. They were also right from the point of view of the
arising twentieth century. Art Nouveau can only be appreciated
on purely aesthetic grounds — and its products might well be
called unprincipled. But if these are looked at on aesthetic
grounds, as they were in Austria and Germany, what a find the
Glasgow group was. Vienna was particularly responsive,
because Vienna in 1900 was, on her own, already on the way to
a straightening out of the Art Nouveau fancies. Joseph Olbrich’s
building of 1898 for the Secession, the club of young artists in
opposition, proves that. While it has a wrought-iron dome the
intertwined laurel-branches of which are Art Nouveau, the

14]

the same Secession then showed of Mackintosh’s work was a
confirmation and made converts — none more successful than
Josef Hoffmann. Quadratl-Hoffmann became his nickname,
because of his preference for squares and rectangles in his
1 decoration. Olbrich was called to Darmstadt by the Grand
Duke of Hesse in 1899. The Grand Duke, a grandson of Queen
Victoria, commissioned furniture and interior decoration for
his palace from Ashbee and Baillie Scott. The German publish-

dome also is a pure hemisphere, and the walls are sheer. What
ing house which had set the competition for the house of an art }
142 (right) Competi- >”
tion design by 1

Mackintosh for a

‘house for an art-

lover’, published in

Germany in 1go1 and

highly influential

141 Josef Hoffmann,
like his master Otto
Wagner, believed in
the complete unity of
architecture, décor
and furnishings; (left)
a rectilinear interior
designed ¢. 1900


lover and which published Mackintosh’s design was also in
Darmstadt. Looking at Mackintosh’s designs one can under-
stand why he took Germany and Austria by storm. Here was the
wilfulness and irregularity of Art Nouveau handled with an
exquisite finesse previously unknown. But here was also a sense
of slender, erect verticals and smooth, unbroken surfaces which
might well serve as a weapon to defeat Art Nouveau. Adherents
of Art Nouveau and its just-emerging opponents could
replenish their arsenals from the Haus eines Kunstfreundes.

The ubiquity and intensity of British influence on the
Continent during these years is evident. Its conflicting directions,
however, require some comment. The influence started with
Morris and the Domestic Revival. It stood then for a revived
interest in craft, that is, the provision of objects tor use, and for
an appreciation of the modest, comfortable, middle-class house
as against the pomposity of the public building and the rich
man’s villa. Then came the influence of Morris's Kelmscott
Press on the one hand — which meant again a sense of aesthetic

143


responsibility, this time in the art of the book - and of Mack-
murdo and ultimately Beardsley on the other, and this
encouraged Art Nouveau rather than responsibility. Voysey
again stood for reason, domestic comfort and prettiness in the
design of interior furnishings; Ashbee and Baillie Scott a little
more floridly for the same. Mackintosh alone, to repeat, could
be a witness for the defence and for the prosecution of both Art
Nouveau and anti-Art Nouveau. Olbrich in 190155 defended
Art Nouveau against England: ‘It is only if one can feel both
democratically and autocratically, that one can evaluate the
imaginative craftsman who wants to express in decorative art
more than mere utility. One may then even approach the
question which no one now ventures to touch: which forces
are more valuable for a nation, those which evolve rationally,
consciously and intellectually good forms . . . or those which
create in the abundant plenitude of their inventiveness hundreds
of new shapes and visions, each carrying the germs of new
possibilities... The limit to which one may advance in expres-
siveness without getting aesthetically objectionable becomes
confused . . . must lie at different levels for different natures and
must affect different natures differently . . . Just as it is not given
to the Englishman to utter the wealth of emotion expressed by
the German soul in the untold variety of its music, the English
spirit cannot ornamentally and constructively express itself with
force, violence, agitation, fantasy.’ But others, several years
earlier, already praised England for these very limitations. This
is what Edmond de Goncourt meant in 1896 when he called the
new style Yachting Style. This is why, in the same year, Pan,
the lavish only just established journal for modern art and
decoration in Germany, brought out an article on English Art
in the House, and this is what made Adolf Loos say that ‘the
centre of European civilization is at present in London’5¢ and
what made the Prussian Board of Trade send Hermann
Muthesius to England to stay there for several years and study
English architecture and design.

144

CHAPTER 1FQUI

Art and Industry

Vienna was first on the Continent in returning to the straight
path of the straight line and the square and rectangle, and, being
Vienna, succeeded in preserving the elegance and the sense of
precious materials of Art Nouveau. In Germany the change is
principally connected with the names of Riemerschmid and
Peter Behrens, and while the change in Austria was an aesthetic
one entirely, in Germany it was also social. Riemerschmid and
his brother-in-law, Karl Schmidt, the founder of the Deutsche
Werkstatten, as carly as 1899 began to tackle the problem ot
cheap furniture and in 1905 at an exhibition showed their first
machine-made furniture, designed, they said, ‘from the spirit
of the machine’. Behrens, who had belonged to the colony of
artists at Darmstadt, abandoned the curve about 1904 and
turned to cubic shapes and square decoration, as they had done
in Vienna, but with greater severity. A few years later he was
given the opportunity by the A.E.G., the German clectricity
combine, of concentrating for a time entirely on factory
architecture and industrial design. But already in 1898 he had
designed glass for quantity production.

In France the revolt against Art Nouveau took yet another
form. It centred on the conquest of the new materials by new
architects. The triumphs of iron architecture at the exhibition
of 1889 had still been the triumphs of engineers, even if the
Eiffel Tower by its very height and position became at once one
of the chief constituents of the architectural scene of Paris.
Being a monument and nota work of utility such as the grandest
of the exhibition halls and bridges — Eiffel’s own Garabit
Viaduct of 1880-8 with a span of $43 feet, the two Roeblings’
Brooklyn Bridge of 1867-83 with a span of 1,595 feet, Fowler

147

and Baker’s Firth of Forth Bridge of 1881-7 with a span of
1,710 feet, the firstan arch bridge, the seconda suspension bridge,
the third a cantilever bridge — the Eiffel Tower had more chance
to be looked at by layman and architect alike asa piece of design
with aesthetic connotations, that is, as architecture. Indeed
Muthesius, the Prussian architect whose studies in England have
been mentioned, listed in a book of 1902, called characteristically
Stilarchitektur und Baukunst, the Crystal Palace, the Bibliothé¢que
Ste-Geneviéve, the Halle des Machines and the Eiffel Tower as
examples of the right kind of architecture for the twenucth
century. In 1913 he added to his list train-sheds and grain
elevators.57

145-6 (left) Eiffel’s tower for the Paris Exhibition of 1889, a virtuoso display
of ironwork 984 ft high; (below) the Firth of Forth Bridge by Fowler and
Baker, 1881-7, the most splendid of all cantilever bridges


Train-sheds were of iron and glass, but grain elevators were
of concrete, France had led the world in the aesthetic apprecia-
tion of iron — the part played by Labrouste and Viollet-le-Duc
has been discussed — she was now going to lead in that of
concrete. The first concrete fanatic of many was Frangois
Coignet. He wrote at the time of the exhibition of 1855 that
‘cement, concrete and iron’ would replace stone, and the year
after took a patent for iron members embedded in concrete —
not the first such patent incidentally — in which they are called
tirants, showing that the tensile strength of mass concrete was
appreciated. In the seventies Joseph Monier worked on posts
and beams of reinforced concrete, and Americans and Germans
made the necessary analyses and calculations on the performance
of the two materials in conjunction. Finally, in the nineties
Francois Hennebique built factories of concrete with steel
reinforcements on the utilitarian grid principle. The factory
illustrated here is of 1895. In 1894 already Anatole de Baudot,
a pupil first of Labrouste, then of Viollet-le-Duc, and their true
follower in the sense that he followed their principles rather
than their forms, decided to use concrete for his church of
St-Jean de Montmartre and not to conceal it. There are pointed
as well as round arches and rib vaults. The internal character is
Gothic, the exterior only vestigially medieval.

147-8 Anatole de Baudot, in St-Jean
de Montmartre (1894~1902, feft and
right), was the first to use reinforced
concrete systematically in a non-indus-
trial building. It is combined with
brick in the facade. The interior has
rib-vaults and other reminiscences of
the Gothic past


While Baudot’s church was still incomplete, in 1g02 Auguste
Perret, thirty years younger, designed the celebrated house in
the rue Franklin. [¢ has many titles to fame. It is the first private
house to use concrete framing. It demonstrates this fact proudly;
even if the concrete posts and beams are still clad in terracotta, it
distinguishes with care between the appearance of supporting
members and infilling pancls — the latter are in lively Art
Nouveau leaf patterns of faience — it opens the fagade in a
U-shape to avoid a backyard, and it faces its staircase entirely

149 One of the first
buildings to use
reinforced conerete
throughout,
allowing vast
windows: Frangois
Hennebique’s
spinning mill at
Tourcoing, of 1895

, —- = ——— -™ Jee

with glass hexagons, proclaiming in this its indebtedness to
Guimard’s Castel Béranger. In 1905 in his garage in the rue de
Ponthieu Perret exposed his concrete skeletons naked; in 1911
in the Théatre des Champs-Elysées he introduced the concrete
skeleton into public architecture. To the end, however, he
refused to test concrete for its possibilities of wide cantilevers
and curved surfaces in tension. This was left to others, one
French by nation, the other at least by race and name.

151 The Théatre des Champs-Elysées in Paris (1911) by Perret is one of the
earliest monumental buildings constructed entirely with a reinforced
concrete frame. In this drawing the frame is shown: the stage is at the right,
and the gallery tiers appear in section

a ied

JA aa

!
it
u

ik

154

154 Houses in Garnier’s Cité Industrielle: simple cubic shapes of concrete,
surrounded by public gardens

Tony Garnier was a few years older than Perret. He won the
Prix de Rome in 1899, but used most of his time there to
develop the plan and the architecture of an ideal industrial town.
The result was sent to the academy in 1901, but at first refused.
It was exhibited in 1904 and published — not without revisions -
in 1917. Meanwhile, in 1905 Edouard Herriot, a socialist like
Garnier, and at the time mayor of Lyons, had begun to make use
of Garnier for municipal building. This gave him the oppor-
tunity to realize some of his ideas. What makes the Cité
Industrielle a milestone in the history of the early twentieth
century is that here for the first time a young architect took as
his theme the needs of a town of today; ‘for industrial require-
ments’, he stated in the introduction, ‘will be responsible for the
foundation of most new towns in the future’. The plan is
developed on a possible site, somewhere, Garnier says, in the
south-east of France, his own homeland. The town is to have

158

155 Railway station of the Cité Industrielle, with large windows, a bold
concrete tower and even bolder cantilevered roofs. This, however, was
designed shortly before 1917, not in 190458

thirty-five thousand inhabitants. The plan refuses to have any-
thing to do with academic tenets of axiality but aims to work in
the interests of those who would live and work in the town.
Planners sixty years later may raise their objections; the plan yet
remains pioneer work, The houses have no backyards. Each
house has at least one bedroom window to the south. The built-
over area does not exceed half the plot. The rest is public green-
spaces. There are plenty of pedestrian passages. The materials
used are cement for foundations, reinforced concrete for beams
and ceilings. ‘All the major buildings are constructed almost
exclusively in reinforced concrete.’ This one sees at once: the
cantilevered roofs of the Municipal Offices and station would
be impossible otherwise and go far beyond what had at the time
been executed. The cubic shapes of the small houses were as
revolutionary. Decoration is not banished but remains *com-
pletely independent of the construction’, Garnier never had an

Wsy

8

7

opportunity to realize anything as bold and sweeping as the
Cité Industrielle, but in the Public Slaughterhouse at Lyons,
built in 1906-13, he did demonstrate dignity in industrial
architecture, and he was one of the very few anywhere in the
world to do so. We shall return presently to success in this field
in Germany. But first the story of reinforced concrete must be
rounded off by reference to the discovery of the new combined
material's structural and aesthetic advantages in the ficld of
arcuated as well as trabeated architecture. Here the first in the
field was once more an engineer: Robert Maillart, a Swiss, but
a pupil of Hennebique. He first suggested and carried out
improvements on the current system of warehouse or factory
construction with posts and beams of concrete by making one
the formerly supporting and supported parts. The mushroom
principle he evolved was discovered at the same time in
America. Soon after, he turned to bridges and again succeeded
in making the arch and the roadway one. In France at the same
moment, to be precise in 1910, Simon Boussiron, another
engineer, built the roof of the railway station of Bercy near

oe le

157 (top) Goods stations at Bercy, outside Paris, by Simon Boussiroen
(1910): the roof is of thin shells of concrete, top-glazed, and concrete has
allowed a daring cantilever at the stde

138 (above) Reintorced concrete appeared in bridge-building with Robert
Maillart’s bridge over the Rhine at Tavanesa (Swatverland) of ryio. Arch
and roadway are a single unit, aesthetically ay well as structurally. Phe
influence of Maillart began to be fele only atter the Segond World War

4156 (left) The closest Garnier came to buildig his Industrial City: part ot

the vast slaughterhouse of La Mouche, Lyons, 1yoy 83. It includes a catde
market. The buildings are of concrete, but the vault of the market hall
(span about 265 ff) is of steel and glass

tol


Be, "we sumer ae ; Sa
' PA mane wl ;
®agmeme

t

ary os

159-60 Max Berg’s Centenary Hall, Breslau, of 1913, fully exploited the
possibilities of concrete. It covers an area of 21,000 square feet with an
economy and grandeur hardly equalled unti] Nervi. Right, a detail of the
reinforced concrete ribs

Paris of very thin concrete vaults of the hyperbolic parabaloid
shape the future of which was to be so spectacular.3? But the
aesthetic possibilities ofarches combining the long sweep ofsteel
with the solidity of stone in architecture, acknowledged by the
public as such, were first recognized to the full by Max Berg
in his Centenary Hall of 1913 at Breslau. Max Berg is not as
well known as he deserves to be. This is largely due to the fact
that already before 1925 he abandoned architecture to devote
himself to a Christian mysticism. And who can say whether
Lothar Schreyer of both Sturm and Bauhaus who tells us about
this is so wrong in secing even in the Centenary Hall ‘the Cosmos
opened to reveal the courses of the stars and the Empyraeum’.6°

The famous names in the Germany and Austria of Perret’s,
Garnier’s and Maillart’s generation are Josef Hoffmann and
Adolf Loos in Austria, Peter Behrens in Germany. To them

162

pe ee oe ee

must be added Otto Wagner, professor at the academy of art in
Vienna, who was only seven years younger than Morris. In his
inaugural lecture, in 1894, he reiterated Viollet-le-Duc’s faith
in the modern age, the need to find forms to express it, and the
conviction that ‘nothing that is not practical can be beautiful’.6!
His buildings of those years were less radical. His stations of the
Stadtbahn of 1894-1901 are in a kind of Baroque Art Nouveau,
emphatically less stimulating than Guimard’s Métro which they
preceeded, and his office buildings and flats are simple, but in
their fenestration not untraditional. The favourite facing with
faience reminds one of Perret. Only one of all Wagner’s works
has the prophetic character which we found for the first time in

161 Otto Wagner’s early stations for the Vienna Stadtbahn display little
interest in cither modern forms or the new mode of transport they served


162 WhileWagner believed that architecture should reflect modern life in
modern materials, only in 1905, in the glass and steel hall of the Vienna
Postal Savings Bank, did he achieve his ideal

Garnier’s Cité Industrielle: the mterior of the Postal Savings
Bank of 1905, with its tapering metal supports and its curved
glass roof.

In speaking of prophctic character here, one is perhaps not
quite right. The buildings of the Cité Industrielle and the Postal
Savings Bank are not prophetic of the twenticth century: they
belong to it, that is, they contributed to its creation, out of the
new materials and their authentically integrated use, out of the
anti-historicism of Art Nouveau and out of William Morris's
faith in serving people’s needs. The buildings designed in the
same ycars by Josef Hoffmann and Adolf Loos must be looked

165

163-5 In 1905 Josef Hoffmann was commissioned to design a palatial house
(above) for M, Stoclet in Brussels. The result proved that the new style, with
its bare straight lines, was as suitable for gracious living as for commerce.
Right, the dining-room, with marble veneers and mosaics by Klimt (see
Ill, 166); below right, the hall, rising through two storeys

at in the same way. Hoffmann’s Palais Stoclet in Brussels
demonstrated once and for all that the new style with its
reliance on unmitigated right angles was as suitable for luxury
as for pure function, for leisure as for work. The secret, if you
are bent on banishing ornament, mouldings, curves altogether,
is fine materials and the play of proportions. The latter
determines the varied and lively exterior of the Palais Stoclet,
the former the interior with its marble facings and its large
mosaics by Klimt. The mosaic is flat decoration, Klimt’s scrolly

166

167 In revolt against what he considered the prettiness of fashionable
Viennese architecture, Adolf Loos banished every suggestion of ornament
and almost of charm. His Steiner House, Vienna, (1910) shows him at his
most uncompromising

trees and figures are exquisitely flattened, and their perfect
suitability to Hoffmann’s ensemble shows once more the part
Art Nouveau could play in the creation of the twentieth-
century style.

Adolf Loos hated Hoffmann and the Wiener Werkstitte of
which Hoffmann was one of the founders and which succeeded
in combining the new, post-Art Nouveau style with an
inimitably Viennese daintiness and prettiness. For the initial
patron of the Werkstatte, the man who had put the necessary
money at rhe disposal of the founder, Mackintosh had designed
a music room. Loos was the purist of the emerging movement.
Ornament and Crime is the title of his most often quoted essay.
This was published in 1go8. The purest of his purist houses and
therefore the most often illustrated is the Steiner House in
Vienna of 1910. Here for the first time the layman would find
it hard to decide whether this might not be of 1930.

166 The Kiss, by Gustav Klimt, water-colour and gouache design for a mosaic
for the dining-room of Hoffinann’s Palas Stoctet (IL 164)

The greatest contribution of Germany during these years
was the foundation of the Deutscher Werkbund in 1907, the
society in which architects, craftsmen and manufacturers met
and in which the new conception of industrial design was
evolved, a conception whose origin in England — in spite of all
the conflicts between Morris’s faith in craft and the new equally
enthusiastic faith in the machine— is made patent by the fact that
the term design had in the end to be taken over by Germany
because of the absence of a German word with the same
meaning. An appreciation of the machine and its possibilities
was not in itself new, and a kind of aesthetic worship of the
machine can be found here and there in all countries and in all
decades of the nineteenth century. As early as 1835 in a parlia-
mentary enquiry in England into the relation between qualities

170

of design and Britain’s exports the neo-classical architect
T.L. Donaldson had said that he knew no ‘example of a perfect
machine which is not at the same time beautiful’.6? Redgrave,
one of Henry Cole’s circle, in his report on design at the 1851
exhibition, had similarly written that in objects ‘where use is
so paramount that ornament is repudiated .. .a noble simplicity
is the result’.63 And so it goes on to Oscar Wilde, the aesthete:
‘All machinery may be beautiful... Do not seek to decorate it."64
But it was still a far step from Wilde's purely aesthetic reaction
and the Cole circle’s recognition of the problem on paper, to its
final facing and solving by the Werkbund.

The Werkbund published ycar-books in the years 1912-15,
and they contain the record of what was achieved. [lustrated
are a tea-set by Riemerschmid for the Deutsche Werkstitten,
linoleum by Riemerschmid for the Delmenhorse Linoleum
factory, and electric kettles and fans by Behrens for the A.E.G.

168-9 Designs by Richard Riemerschmid for mass production: (left)
linoleum tor the Delmenhorst factory, 1912, and (below) a tea-set for the
Deutsche Werkstitten

;


oh
a}

Te

i
F

The case of Behrens is the most significant in Europe at that
moment. The Allgemeine Elektrizititsgellschatt or A.E.G.
under its director Paul Jordan took up the new Werkbund
principles in earnest and made Behrens the architect of their
buildings, factories as well as shops, the designer of their
products and even their stationery. Behrens was the first of the
line that leads to the present-day American stylists or Gio Ponti
and Arne Jacobsen. But his buildings seen purely as architecture
are as important. What Garnier was doing at Lyons, Behrens

"75

179 The Fagus factory at Alfeld on the Leine, designed in 1910 by Behrens’
young pupil Walter Gropius, summed up all that had been achieved in
pre-war industrial architecture. Slim brick posts, and all the rest glass; no
posts at the corners at all

did in Berlin, and his expression of the nobility of work is even
purer, and more detached from motifs of the past, than Garnier’s.

The final synthesis of all that had been developed in industrial
architecture to that time is the Fagus factory for shoe-trees at
Alfeld on the Leine, which was designed by the much younger
Walter Gropius, pupil of Behrens, in collaboration with Adolf
Meyer, in 1910, the very year of Loos’s Steiner House. The two
buildings have this in common: a ruthlessly cubic shape and the
total absence of ornament. But Gropius dealt with a novel job,
Loos with an old one, and Gropius courageously picked up the
threads of the existing, utilitarian, essentially anonymous
architecture of glass set in a structural frame, such as they were
to illustrate it in the Werkbund year-book of 1913. And he
imbued it with the nobility he had scen in Behrens’ factories
and a social awareness ultimately derived from the Morris
Movement.

176

The illustrations just referred to accompanied an article by
Gropius on the development of modern industrial architecture
in one of the Werkbund year-books. Other articles were by
Riemerschmid, by Behrens and also by Muthesius, who more
than any other was responsible for leading the Werkbund in the
twentieth-century direction. He had to fight his case against
the opposition of van de Velde, who pleaded for individual
expression where Muthesius wanted to develop standards.


CHAPTER FIVE

Towards the International Style

Muthesius in the famous discussion at Cologne in 1914 said:
‘Architecture and with it the whole area of activity of the
Werkbund moves towards standardization (Typisierung) .. .
Only standardization can . . . once again introduce a universally
valid, self-certain taste.” Van de Velde answered: ‘As long as
there are artists in the Werkbund . . . they are going to protest
against any suggestion of a canon of standardization. The artist,
according to his innermost essence, is a fervent individualist, a
free, spontaneous creator. He will never voluntarily submit to
a discipline forcing on him a type, a canon.’ It must have been
a memorable moment — Art Nouveau at its best resisting the
needs and declining the responsibilities of the new century.

In fact the victory of Muthesius was assured even before the
Cologne meeting. The meeting was held apropos the first
Werkbund exhibition, and this exhibition, at least in its most
important buildings, actually demonstrated that victory, and
would have demonstrated it internationally if the outbreak of
the First World War had not disrupted European unity and held
up cultural progress. Among the buildings, Bchrens’s Festival
Hall was disappointingly classical, Hoffmann’s Austrian pavilion
equally classical outside, but inside had a playfulness which was
as back ward-pointing, as was van de Velde’s impressive theatre
with its emphatic curves. The two most powerful buildings
were the Glass House by Bruno Taut and Gropius’s Halle des
Machines and attached offices of a fictitious factory. Taut’s
prismatic dome was the most original shape in the exhibition, a
prophecy of geodesic domes to come. The glass wall below 1s
in the line of descent of Guimard and Perret. Groptus at this
moment was clearly influenced, not only by Behrens but even
more by Frank Lloyd Wright whose work had been made

t80 Staircase in Bruno Taut’s Glass House at the Cologne Werkbund Exhibioon
pt 1914, entirely of glass bricks (ct. JM. 101) and iron

182 fright) Carson Pirie Scott »
store, Chicago, by Sullivan
(1899-1904). Note the
dominant steel frame, clad in
white terracotta and ending in
a (since removed) caves gallery;
the ‘Chicago windows’ (fixed
centre and movable sides); and
the lush ornament framing the
display windows (see Ill. 25)

181 (left) Glass House by Bruno
Taut (1914), with a prismatic dome
foreshadowing Buckminster Fuller

known to Europe first by two publications issued in Berlin in
1910 and 1911 and then by lectures of Berlage’s who had
himself visited Chicago in 1911.

The Chicago to which he made his pilgrimage was, however,
no longer that of Sullivan, though Sullivan was still alive.
After the completion of the Carson Pirie Scott store in 1904, he
received no further commissions of importance and died lonely
and disappointed in 1922. When at the great Chicago Exhibition
of 1893 the classicism of Beaux-Arts derivation had triumphed,
he had prophesied that this would put back architecture in
America by fifty years. He was nearly right. The so-called
School of Chicago fizzled out during the last years before the
First World War, and though something equally influential
took its place, it was not of the calibre of the work of the School
of Chicago. What had been work in new materials and for new
purposes was replaced by work — admittedly aesthetically
brilliant — in the limited field of the private house.

Yet Frank Lloyd Wright’sis not entirely an aesthetic achieve-
ment. What it consisted of is casily said: a new vision of the

180

183-4 Frank Lloyd Wright was in the office of Louis Sullivan when he pro-
duced the Charnley House, Chicago (1891-2, below lef), with Sullivanesque
ornament on the balcony. It is still a closed design, but its low projecting
roof and general severity hint at his later buildings such as the Martin
House, Buffalo (above) of 1906, with its complex interpenetration of
indoor and outdoor space

house embedded in its natural surroundings and opening
towards them by means of terraces and cantilevered roofs,
and a new vision of the interior of the house as freely inter-
communicating spaces. There was practical precedent for both
these things in American domestic building before him, as an
aesthetic experience they belong to him entirely and by their
influence from 1910 onwards they established new ideals for
Europe as well. The operative dates are these: the Charnley
House of 1891, severely cubic but closed; the Winslow House
of 1893 with far oversailing eaves but still closed; the Studio.
Oak Park of 1895, the first with a complex interlocked plan.
and so to the watershed of 1y00-1 when the type was fairly
established and to the maturity of the Martin House at Butfalo
of 1906 and the Coonley and the Robie Houses of 1907-9.

183

185 Plan of the
Martin House,
Buffalo, by Frank
Lloyd Wright (1906).
The rooms interlock
in a spreading pattern
among plantings.
There are scarcely
any internal doors;
instead Wright uses
changes of level,
columns, and open
arches. The servants’
quarters, top left,

are equally open.
The view in Ill, 184
is from the far right
of this plan

184

5 GARAGE

haber
PYING-ROOMS J. CARRIAGE PORCH a

3 SDININGROOA CONSERVATORY {

c RECEPTION HALL ‘STABLE

G OFFICE PADDOCK

E KITCHEN = N BICYCLES

fF SERVIS DINING-ROOM — O. LAVATORY

S VESTIEIAE = PL PER

H PORCH


188 Design for terraced housing on the esplanade at Scheveningen, by
J.J. P. Oud, 1917

As has already been said, 1910 saw the first publication of
Wright’s work in Europe, 1914 Gropius’s Wright-inspired
office range of the exhibition factory at Cologne, 1915 Rob
van't Hoff building a complete Wright house in Holland. But
Holland very soon abandoned Wright’s message and developed
Wright’s forms in a new spirit. It was the spirit of Cubism.
His forms were sufficiently cubic to allow for such a change
of meaning. De Stijl, the carrier of this transformation, was
started in 1917, and its achievements and repercussions are
outside the bounds of this book. Its most significant architectural
expression at the beginning is Oud’s design for seaside housing
at Scheveningen, still as simple in the block shapes of the
elements as Garnier’s in his industrial city. Then almost
immediately unfunctional complications were introduced to
indicate aesthetically the interaction of planes. Interaction of
planes is also the basic aesthetic conception behind Rietveld’s
famous chair of 1917. It is more ingenious and was more
stimulating than his own earlier work, but a chair he did nine
years earlier, when he was only twenty, has a Sachlichkeit which
acquaintance with Cubism could only disturb.

Us7

Germany in the first years of the Werkbund was indeed not
alone in seeking simplicity and functional form for objects of
everyday use. The Dutch contribution began in the first decade
of the twentieth century. The Danish contribution began too,
and Denmark was to gather'strength until some forty years later
it had become one of the most important countries in the world
in the field of the crafts and industrial design. The furniture and
metalwork of Johan Rohde, a painter at first, acquainted with
and appreciative of Gauguin, Van Gogh, Toulouse-Lautrec, the
Nabis, Toorop, is of great beauty as well as functional sound-
ness. Rohde was led in the direction of design by the Pont-Aven
attitude, but realized early that the introduction of figures heavy
with symbolic significance was not an answer to the problem of
design. His answer is nearer Voysey’s, and the cupboard illus-
trated is as independent of past styles as Voysey at his rare best.
Rohde’s metalwork was largely designed for Georg Jensen, the
silversmith, and his workshop, and Jensen’s own cutlery of the
same years shows the identity of approach of the two men.

“ot 189 (left} Mahogany cupboard
a designed by Johan Rohde in
1897 for his own use, and

made by the brothers H. P.
and L. Larsen

190~1 (right) Danish
silverware: teapot and sugar
bowl designed by Johan
Rohde and made by Georg
Jensen (about 1906), and
cutlery designed and made in
1908 by Georg Jensen


Of the major nations of Europe only Italy has so far not been
mentioned in these pages. Her role during the years here under
consideration and up to 1909 had indeed been secondary, in
architecture as well as painting and sculpture. Medardo Rosso,
it may be argued, mattered internationally, and Sommaruga,
D’Aronco, Cattaneo made their Floreale in their own way out
of elements of the Vienna Secession and the naturalism of
French Art Nouveau. But their message was not essentially
different from the message of those who had inspired them.
The years 1909-14 changed all that. Futurism is one of the
constituent movements of the revolution which established the

192 Sant’Elia died too young to have any chance of realizing such brilliant Futurist
ideas as this, with multi-level traffic (cars below, pedestrian ways linking terraced
buildings above), developed sketchily in 1913-14

lt!
|

_

,


193
Sant’Elia’s
projected
skyscraper
with recessed
storeys,
about 1919.
There is no
ornament

twentieth century, in aesthetic thought, in painting and in
architecture. Without Marinetti, Boccioni, Sant’Elia the carly
twentieth century cannot be described. In architecture, alas, the
outbreak of the war and the premature death of SantElia in
1916, prevented anything being actually built. As in the case of
Garnier’s Cité Industrielle we must go to drawings, to visions

1gI

of the future. And Sant’ Elia’s is indeed like Garnier’ s, a contribu-
tion to town planning at least as much as to architecture. In
architecture he was the descendant of Vienna and the Floreale,
though other drawings prove that he was aware of the new
rectangularity as well, and of specific Parisian work. Henri
Sauvage in 1912-13 in a block of flats, 26 rue Vavin, had
conceived the idea of increasing the light in city streets by
stepped-back upper stories. Sant’Elia took up the idea (or re-
created it?), and later it became part of the zoning law of New
York and an internationally accepted principle. It is an urban,
indeed metropolitan, principle, and in this lies its importance, as
the importance of Futurism to architecture lies in its adherents’
passionate commitment to the city.

The city was the most urgent and the most comprehensive
problem of the nineteenth century. It had been criminally
neglected by the architects, and by governments as well. To cut
boulevards through Paris had its traffic advantages and offered
plenty of spectacular points de vue for the placing of monumental
buildings, to open up the glacis of the fortress walls of Vienna,
to create a generous ring of gardens and ideal sites for yet larger
public buildings was no solution. These urban displays had
their aesthetic points — and who does not get a visual thrill out
of looking up the Avenue de I’Opéra or the Rue Royale? — but |
the real problem was the visually unpromising one of housing
a population which in London (the area which in 1888 became!
the County of London), grew between 1801 and 1901 from
under a million to nearly four and a half million, and in
Manchester from about one hundred thousand to about five
hundred and fifty thousand. Equally unpromising visually and
equally urgent was the problem of the siting of industry. If
architects did not care, manufacturers cared only rarely. But
Robert Owen, the socialist manufacturer, designed in 1817 a
model village with factory and housing, as Ledoux had done
twenty years before, and about 1850 the first manufacturers
built more modest versions of such schemes, the largest and
most convincing being Sir Titus Salt’s Saltaire near Leeds which

194 Henri Sauvage’s flats at 26 rue Vavin, Paris (1912-13); recessed upper storeys
and white tile facing give more light to the street

1
1
f

dates from 1850 to about 1870. The huge mill dosninates the
streets of the workers’ houses which are laid out unimaginatively,
ifacceptably from the purely hygenic point of view. Then came
Morris and Norman Shaw, Morris with his fervent sermons of
happy labour and social duties, Norman Shaw with his pretty
houses of moderate size. And so Bedford Park (sce p. 32) was
built just outside London in 1875 as the first garden suburb. It
was for a middle-class with aesthetic leanings, not for the
working-class, but its message could be adapted easily. Make
your houses friendly, vary their appearance, leave trees on the

195 Saltaire near Leeds, planned in 1850, was the first large industrial
housing estate in the world: 820 houses were built in a grid dominated by
the mill, the school and the institute, left, and the church, above the mill.
The sanitary improvement was great, with service lanes between the rows
of houses and a park across the river, but visually Saltaire contributed
nothing. (The garden-city housing, top left, is later)


“poy

‘ -*
Whi.
Wl tar
ste
zi
4 t

196 Port Sunlight was begun by the firm of Lever's in 1888 on the more
human and airy garden suburb pattern: semi-detached houses of brick are
scattered among trees so that the town itself is in a park

site. They were all lessons learned at once, and already in 1888
Port Sunlight was begun outside Liverpool for the employees
of Lever’s, and in 1895, Bournville for the employees of
Cadbury’s. In these cases, as at Saltaire, the factory was part of
the general scheme. This principle was extended and systemat-
ized in Ebenezer Howard's Tomorrow which came out in 1898,
and again as Garden Cities of Tomorrow in 1899. Now the phrase
was coined. Let us leave the old cities, vast, dirty, crammed,
noisy, and build new ones, to a manageable size and a human
scale, with their own factories and offices, gardens and spacious
parks.

195


197 At Letchworth Garden City, begun in 1904, Parker and Unwin
attempted to do ona large scale what Shaw’s Bedford Park had done for an
élite: the houses are picturesque variants on the English cottage style
popularized by Voysey and Baillie Scott, mixing, brick, tile and roughcast,
in all sizes from single dwellings to smal] rows

But Howard’s was a diagram, the first real garden city,
Parker and Unwin’s Letchworth, about thirty-five miles north
of London, was started in 1904, but yet in 1931 had no more
than fifteen thousand inhabitants; and the Hampstead Garden
Suburb, started in 1907 and also by Parker and Unwin, was a
garden suburb, not a garden city, as was a design by Riemer-
schmid of 1907 and the Krupps’ Margarethenhéhe outside
Essen of 1912. The message was unmistakable. The garden city,
or what we now call the satellite town, the Trabantenstadt, is
possible, it is a help even, but it is not the final solution. The big
city has come to stay, and we must come to terms with it. That
is what Tony Garnier was the first to see. The Cité Industrielle

196

is a milestone as much as Howard’s Garden Cities because, as
has already been observed, it is the fiction of a real town on a
real site, and because its designer is clearly as interested in
its industrial and commercial districts as in its public buildings
and houses. Howard’s was a social reformer’s contribution;
Garnier’s the potential architect-planner’s employed by a
government department or a city council; the Futurists’
contribution was delirious enthusiasm for exactly that which
Howard was running away from.

Here is Marinetti and the Futurist Manifesto of 1909: ‘We
declare that the splendour of the world has been enriched by a
new beauty — the beauty of speed . . . A roaring, racing car,
rattling past like a machine gun, is more beautiful than the
Winged Victory of Samothrace ... We will sing of the stirring
of great crowds — workers, pleasure-seekers, rioters... We
will sing the midnight fervour of shipyards blazing with electric
moons...’ and so on to stations and the smoke of trains, to

198 The garden suburb became popular throughout Europe, and was the
pattern chosen by Richard Riemerschmid; below, his design for houses for
textile workers at Hagen, Westphalia, of 1907, in entire accord with the
principles preached by Raymond Unwin

MAGENEA PExpLuMpos
TURD £205 BEN OS CEL SM

factories, to bridges, to steamers and finally to aeroplanes. And
here is Sant’Elia’s Messaggio published in the catalogue of his
exhibition Citta Nuova and remodelled by Marinetti to be the
Manifesto of Futurist Architecture: ‘We must invent and build
ex novo our modern city like an immense and tumultuous
shipyard, active, mobile and everywhere dynamic, and the
modern building like a gigantic machine . . . Lifts must swarm
up the facades like serpents of glass and iron. The house of

concrete, iron and glass, without ornament . . . brutish in its
mechanical simplicity . . . must rise from the brink of a
tumultous abyss, the street . . . gathering up the traffic of the

metropolis connected for necessary transfers to metal cat-walks
and high-speed conveyor belts.’

Perhaps, in spite of Behrens and Gropius, the new style
needed someone to grow lyrical over it to win the day. The
Futurists provided that. The Expressionists took it on after the
war and dreamed up their first steel and all-glass skyscrapers,
and finally, only in the middle of the century, the synthesis of
the garden city and the metropolitan city was achieved, with
garden cities culminating in urban centres, garden estates for
ten thousand, with skyscrapers carefully placed, and office
buildings in various groupings enclosing patio gardens.

With this, architecture has made a contribution to human
life as great as architecture ever did. Is the contribution of
painting and sculpture on the same level, and are the so-called
fine arts of painting and sculpture and the so-called applied arts
of architecture and design working towards the same aims,
meeting with the same kind and intensity of response? So it
had been in the Middle Ages, so in the Baroque. But that mutual
sympathy, that common understanding had not always been a
matter of course. The Town Hall of Amsterdam and the
Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis which Rembrandt painted for it,
do not belong together. Those who praised the one would not
necessarily praise the other, and if some did they would do it
for opposite reasons. Holland in the seventeenth century was
a middle-class republic. It was here that the figure of the mis-

198

understood, the neglected, the starving artist first appeared.
Moreover, Holland was a Protestant country and not in need of
the visual arts for worship. The second age of the art that
mattered being unwelcome was the first middle-class age, the
nineteenth century, or rather the nineteenth and the later
eighteenth century which belongs to it. Neglect grew into
active opposition; art on the other hand in Goya, in Blake, in
Runge went into a secret language. If you want to understand
the artist, you must entrust yourself to him and work at it; he is
no longer going to work for you. Patronage in the old sense was
dead; what patronage there was to be was as individual, as
exposed as the artist’s gospel itself. Isolation, half imposed and
half self-imposed, was the fate of the painters of Barbizon, of
Courbet, of the Impressionists, of the Post-Impressionists. If
anything, the pitch of hostility rose. The social development of
architecture was bound to be different. There never can be an
architect as isolated as a painter. But while this relative security
was a gratifying fact for the architect, it was not beneficial for
architecture. It meant quite simply that in the nineteenth century
the most ruthlessly creative minds did not choose the profession
ofthearchitect. This explains toa certain extent the phenomenon
of the collapse of aesthetic values in so much of the century. It
also explains why it is that the most forward-pointing work so
often came from outsiders. The reason why it came from
engineers is that the century was one of materialism and hence
of science and technology. No century ever before had seen
comparable progress in these fields. The progress was made at
the expense of aesthetic sensibility of the subtle kind that would
have granted acceptance to Impressionism and Post-Impression-
ism. The Crystal Palace met with success, but so also did the
horrors of decorative art displayed in it. Architects’ architecture
and salon or academy art went together, engineers’ and
explorers’ architecture and explorers’ are did not.

But this statement is perhaps too abrupt. The roads followed
by the best painters, the best craftsmen or manufacturers and
the best architects did occasionally meet. The earliest was the

199

most fruitful meeting; it is that between Morris’s preaching
and the conversion to craft and design of young painters and
young architects. Otherwise meetings were mostly much less
significant. One might perhaps just say that the turn to intimacy,
the turn away from bombast was of a similar nature in the
English Domestic Revival and in Impressionism in painting of
the same years. One can perhaps also say that the elegance of
facade detail which replaced the grossness and bluster of the
High Victorian architects corresponds to the elegance of
Impressionist painting as against Courbet’s. But that does not
take us very far.

It is different with Art Nouveau. Here indeed certain painters
were in full accord with the craftsmen-designers. If Art
Nouveau is characterized by radical innovation, and by the
incantation of the curve, then Gauguin certainly belongs to it —
as one of the illustrations to this survey has already demonstrated
— and so do the northerners Munch and Toorop and Hodler,
and to a more limited degree Maurice Denis, Vallotton, the
Seurat of The Circus, the Signac of the Fénéon portrait. But
after that moment, the short years about 1900, what happened?
Architecture went the way of Garnier and Perret, of Loos and
Hoffmann, of Behrens and Berg, and design the way of the
Werkbund, but painting went the way to Fauvism and Cubism,
to the Briicke and the Blaue Reiter, to Futurism and Kandinsky.
It is easy to see the similarities of approach and result in
Bindesbdll’s plates, Gaudi’s pinnacles of the Sagrada Familia
and Picasso’s pottery, but the dates will not match. It is also
easy to see as one, cubist paintings of the geometrical kind and
cubic architecture of the 1920s — after all Le Corbusier produced
both — or Léger’s machine men and the machine-worshippers
among the architects. But these comparisons are superficial.
They do not concern the essential change, which is that
architects and designers once more accepted social respon-
sibilities, that architecture and design consequently became a
service, and buildings and objects of daily use were designed not
only to satisfy the aesthetic wishes of their designers but also to

200

fulfil their practical purposes fully and enthusiastically. Painters
and sculptors moved in exactly the opposite direction. They had
been cut off from their public already in the nineteenth century.
Now they were cut off beyond redemption. Courbet shocked
his public because of his message, but that message was perfectly
plain to everybody. The Impressionists were attacked for their
paintings not being recognizable. But that proved a matter of
visual habits. Their aesthetic aims were still those of Titian and
Velazquez. Only they had no other than aesthetic aims and that
deprived them of the sympathy which the public could extend
as long as the spiritual content of a work of art concerned it.
To recover these lost spiritual contacts was the most important
effort of Gauguin, van Gogh, the Symbolists, Munch, Hodler —
all of them. But they failed, and while from van Gogh’s
longing for his paintings to be accepted by simple people, like
the broadsheets they read, there might have been a bridge to
the architects’ and designers’ endeavours towards a style for all,
there was none from cubism and the dynamic abstract art of
Kandinsky.

Gropius hoped there might be, and the Bauhaus made the
noble effort of inviting Klee and other abstractionists under its
roof. No successful effort has been made since. To offer an
abstract artist a wall in a building, or an abstract sculptor a place
in a courtyard is no substitute. To force the artist into direct
social service against his better aesthetic conviction, as is the
principle of Socialist Realism and was that of National-Socialist
Realism, is even less of a help. In fact there is no help. The gulf
between Jackson Pollock and Mies van der Rohe or even Nervi
is beyond bridging. This book is not the place to suggest
remedies or foretell the future. Here it must be enough to state
that what is most disastrous in the visual arts of the twentieth
century and what is most hopeful was fully in existence by the
time the Age of the World Wars dawned.

Notes on the Text

1
2

3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10

it

12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

25

26
27
28
29

The True Principles of Pointed or
Chistian Architecture, 1841, p. 1.
Les Beaux-Arts réduits @ un méme
principe, 1747, P. 47-

The Analysis of Beauty, edited by
Joseph Burke, Oxford 1955,
PP. 32-3.

A. Memmi Elementi dell? Architettura
Lodoliana, Rome 1786, Vol. 1, p. 62.
True Principles, p. 26.

J. of Des. and Manuf, 1V, 1850, p.175.
J. of Des. and Manuf., 1, 1849, p. 80.
Redgrave, Supplementary Report on
Design by the Juries... , 1852, p. 720.
Owen Jones, The True and the False
in the Decorative Arts, 1863 (lectures
given in 1852), p. 14.

J. of Des. and Manuf., V, p. 158 and
Supplementary Report on Design,
p. 708.

J. of Des. and Manuf. 1V, pp. 10, etc.,
and 74, etc.

So Mrs Stanton tells me, quoting
from one of the many unpublished
letters which will go into her mono-
graph on Pugin.

Library Edition, xxxv, p. 47

J. of Des. and Manuf., IV, as before.
J. of Des. and Manuf., VI, p. 16.
Entretiens, 1, 451.

Entretiens, 1, 472.

Entretiens, II, 289.

Entretiens, 1, 388.

Entretiens, [, 321.

Entretiens, Il, 114.

Entretiens, UN, 67.

Entretiens, Il, 55.

Remarks on Secular and Domestic
Architecture, Present and Future, 1858,
pp. 224 and Io9.

The Seven Lamps of Architecture The
Lamp of Obedience, par. IV and V.
Collected Works, xxii, 315.

Collected Works, xxii, 15.

Collected Works, xxii, 11.

JW. Mackail, The Life of Willians
Morris, World's Classics, I, 15.

202

30
31
32

34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

30

5

$2
33

S4

Collected Works, xxii, 9.

Collected Works, xxii, 25.

Collected Works, xx, 40 and 42.
Collected Works, xxii, 40.

Collected Works, xxii, 33.

Collected Works, xxii, 42.

Collected Works, xxii, 46.

Collected Works, xxii, 26.

Collected Works, xxiii, 145-6.
Collected Works, xxii, 22.

Collected Works, xxii, 23-4.
Collected Works, xxii, 47.

Collected Works, xxii, 335.

Collected Works, xxii, 48.

J.W. Mackail, loc. cit., [, 116,

J. W. Mackail, loc. cit., HI, 24.
Collected Works, xxii, 73.

Collected Works, xxii, 41.
Kindergarten Chats, edn. of 1947, 187.
Quoted from a remarkably carly
source, the Drawing Book of the
School of Design, by the Romantic or
Nazarene painter William Dyce,
published in 1842-3. The passage in
question was reprinted in the Journal
of Des. and Manuf., V1, 1852.

Both quotations are taken from S.
Tschudi Madsen: Sources of Art
Nouveau, Oslo/New York, 1956.
They appear on pages 177 and 178.
Les Formules de la Beauté architecton-
ique moderne, Brussels, 1923, pp. 65-6.
The Studio, 1, 1893, 236.

The only evidence is a caption in The
Studio of 1899, and there are intrinsic
reasons against too carly a date.
Quoted from Madsen, loc. cit., 300.
The pieces are now in the Bethnal
Green Museum and are as follows:
by Gallé a tray, a work-table, a
screen and a commode, by Majorelle
three cabinets, a tea-table, an arm-
chair and two mays, by Gaillard a
chair, by Christiansen a stool, by A.
Darras three chairs, by Pérol Fréres
a wardrobe, a bedstead and a com-
mode, by E. Bagués a writing-table,


an armchair, a chair and a stool, by the station, the assembly halls and

Jallot a chair, and in addition panel- the theatre. On the other hand, the
ling and settle by the Germans J.J. station in the geound-plan of ryo1—4
Graf and Spindler and a chair de- has already the long fingers, and
signed by Eckmann for Bing. these can only be interpreted as
5§ Zweckmassig oder — phantasievoll., covered arrival and departure bays
quoted from H. Scling and others: for cars, cabs, lorries, etc. This
Jugendstil, Heidelberg and Munich, being su, they had very probably
1959, pp. 417-18. already the thin far-projecting con-
§6 Ins Leere gesprochen, 1897-1900, Inns- crete roofs on slim supports.
bruck, 1932, p. 18. 59 See C.S. Whitney in Journal of the
57 Stilarchitektur..., pp. 42-3; Jahrbuch Concrete Instinte, Vol. 49, 1953,
Deutschen Werkbundes, 1913, p. 30. p. $24.
38 M. Christophe Pawlowski in his Go Erinnerungen an Simm und Bauhaus,
new book on Tony Garnier (Centre Munich 1956, p. 154
de Recherche d’ Urbanisme, Paris 61 Afoderne Architektur, Vienna 1896,
1967) proves that some of the archi- p. 41.
tecturally most striking buildings of 62 Reports from Committees, 1836, X,
the Cité Industrielle do not belong to PP. 29, ete.
the work done by Garnier in Rome 63 Supplementary Report on Design,
im 1901-4 but were added before the Pp. 708.
publication of the scheme in form of 64 Essays and Lectures, 4th ed., 1913,
a book in 1917. This applies e.g. ta p.178. The lecture was given in 1882.

Location of Objects

Royal Collection (reproduced by gracious permission of Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II) 50; Amsterdam, Gemeente Musea 187; Berlin, Louis Werner 65;
Copenhagen, Georg Jensen A/S 190; Copenhagen, Kunstindustrimuseet 45, 47,
48, 71, Copenhagen, H.P. Rohde 189, 191; Edinburgh, Mrs M.N. Sturrock 124;
Frankfurt, Muscum fiir Kunsthandwerk 170; Glasgow, The House of Frazer 143;
Glasgow Museum and Art Gallery 129; Glasgow University Collection 136, 138;
Glasgow School of Art 137; Helensburgh, F.C. Lawson 139; Leicester Museum
and Art Gallery 123; Letchworth, Miss Jean Stewart 126; London, Geffrye Museum
122; London, A. Halcrow Verstage 10; London, Victoria and Albert Museum (1,

2, 13, 72, 124, 125; Lyon Musée des Beaux-Arts 153. 154. 155; Munich, Dr Kurt
Martin 83; Munich, Stadtmuscum $4, 80, 171; Nancy, Musée de l'Ecole 61, 62,
73, 74; New York, Lewyt Corporation 42; Nuremberg, Germanisches Nanonal-
museum 78; Paris, Coll. Bernard-Fort 46; Paris, Léon Meyer 68; Paris, Musée des
Arts Decoratifs 34, 35. 37, 38, 41, 63, 64, 66, 67, 70, 75, 76, 77; Paris, Musée de la
France d’Outremer 40; Paris, Musée National d'Art Moderne fy; Straybourg,
Musée des Beaux-Arts 166, Utrecht, Centraal Museunr der Gemeente 186;
Walthamstow, William Morris Gallery J ifiy Washington, Freer Gallery of
Art 28; Wolfsgarten, Prince Ludwig of Hesse 79; Zurich, Kunstgewerbemuseum $3.

12

203

Biographical Notes

Asupte, Charles Robert (1863-1942).
English architect, designer and author,
Ashbee was a pupil of Bodley. He
founded the Guild and School of
Handicraft in 1888, and subsequently
moved the guild into the country to
Chipping Campden. He exhibited
regularly at the Arts and Crafts
exhibitions and also at the Vicnna
Secession. The Guild was discontinued
owing to the First World War. See
Ills. 124, 126.

Baker, Sir Benjamin (1840-1907). Eng-
lish engineer. In 1891 he began his
long association with John Fowler.
They were jointly responsible for
the London Metropolitan Railway,
and various stations and _ bridges.
Their greatest work was the Forth
Bridge; both were knighted at its
opening in 18g0. Baker was also
consulted for the Aswan Dam and
designed the vessel in which Cleo-
patra’s needle was brought to London.
See Hl. 146.

Bauvot, Anatolede (1834-1915). French
architect and theoretician. De Baudot
was a pupil of Labrouste and Viollet-
le-Duc. As an Inspector of Historic
Monuments he carried out the restora~
tion of numerous ancient buildings,
and as a government architect he was
responsible for a great deal of varied
building. As a teacher he defined the
use of reinforced materials along the
lines he had himself employed at
St-Jean de Montmartre. See Ills. 147-8.

Besrens, Peter (1868-1940). German
architect, decorator, painter, modeller,
engraver and designer of type. He
started within the Jugendstil, but by
tgo4 had emancipated himself from it
and turned towards a rational cubic
style. In 1907 he was made consultant
to the AEG for which he designed his
best buildings. He became director of
the Diisseldorf School of Applied

204

Arts in 1903 and Professor of Archi-
tecture at the Vienna Academy in
1922. See Els. 173-8.

Berc, Max (1870-1947). As architect to
the town of Breslau he designed the
Centenary Hall for the 1913 exhibi-
tion. Later he withdrew from archi-
tecture. See Ils. 159-60.

Bervace, Hendricus Petrus (1856-1934).
Dutch architect, studied with Semper
and then in Italy. He placed great
importance on the honest use of
materials, especially brick. His in-
fluence was strongest in the Nether-
lands, where he published and lec-
tured, and was charged with planning
the enlargement of The Hague (1907~
8) and Amsterdam (from 1913). See
Hl 118.

BERNARD, Emile (1868-1941). French
painter and craftsman. In 1888 during
a stay at Pont-Aven with Gauguin he
abandoned academic art and Impres-
sionism to turn to Syathetism or
Cloisonnism. From 1905 to 1910 he
defended his theories in La Rénovation
esthétique. Much of his work at Pont-
Aven belongs to proto-Art Nouveau.
Later his art became more conven-
tional. See Hl. 46.

Binvessgit, Thorvald (1846-1908).
Danish designer. An architect by
training, Bindesbgll designed furni-
ture, silver, leatherwork, etc. How-
ever, he is most important as a
ceramic artist. Under the influence of
Far Eastern art he developed a very
individual style which is abstract and
independent and of a timeless spon-
taneity. See Ills. 47-8.

Boussiron, Simon (1873-1958). French
engineer. He began in the office of
Eiffel, but left it in 1899 and spent the
rest of his life exploiting the use of
reinforced concrete. See Ill. 157.

Bunning, James B. (1802-63). In 1843
he was appointed Clerk of the City’s


Works for London. He built the Coal
Exchange, and also Holloway Prison,
852, and the Metropolitan Cattle
Market (Caledonian Market), 1855.
See Ill. 4.

CHARPENTIER, Alexandre (1856-1909).
French sculptor and designer. Char-
penticr was a member of the Cing,
and then of the Six group. He was
famous for his furniture and the
bronze plaques which he often used
for furniture and bookbindings. See
Hi. 76.

Conramin, V. (1840-93). French en-
gineer. Contamin collaborated with
Dutert in the building of the famous
Hall des Machines at the Paris Exhibi-
tion of 1889, which set the stamp on
the triumph of iron and stcel in
modern construction and spread the
knowledge of its multifarious possi-
bilities. See Hl. 7.

Cranacu, Wilhelm Lucas von (born
1861). German painter of portraits
and landscapes; Cranach also made
models of castles. Under the in-
fluence of the Russian Julovsky he
created objets d'art. See Ill. 65.

Daum, the brothers Auguste (1853-
1909) and Antonin (1864-1930).
French glass-workers. Strmulated by
the success of Gallé at the Paris
Exhibition of 1889, they began to
produce glassware in their works at
Nancy, and after the Chicago Exhi-
bition in 1893 their work achieved an
international reputation. See Ils. 69,

73.

Durert, Ferdinand (1854-1906). French
architect. A pupil of Lebas and Ginain,
Dutert concerned himself with the
rational use of iron in building. See
He 7.

Eckmann, Otto (1865-1902). German
typographer and designer. In 1894 he
adopted the Jugendstil in his typo-
graphical creations. His version of Art
Nouveau is one in which vegetable
forms are prominent. In 1895-7 he
contributed to Pan, In his furniture
structure is given its due emphasis.
See Hls. 59, 60, 79.

Elreet, Gustave (1832-1923). Brench
engineer. Eiffel is above all famous for
his use of iron and steel. Thanks to a
combination of precise calculations
anda keen feeling for function, Eiffel’s
work is in the main line of rationalist
architectural development in France.
See Ils. 144-5.

ENpELL, August (1871-1925). German
designer. He studied philosophy and
as an artist he was self-taught. He was
at first inspired by Obrist. In 1896 he
built the Atelier Elvira, in Munich.
Later he was Director of the Breslau
Academy. See ls. 83, 87, 89.

Fowter, Sir John (1817-1898). English
engineer, best known for his work on
railways. Sct up his own business in
1844, and became enginecr to the
London Metropolitan Railway, In
1865 he became president of the
Institute of Civil Engincers - its
youngest ever. He worked with Baker
(q.v.) on the Forth Bridge, completed
in 1887, From 1871 he was gencral
engineering adviser to the Khedive
Ismail of Egypt. See Ill. 146.

Gat.iarb, Eugéne (1862-1933). French
furniture designer, one of the colla-
borators of Samuel Bing, See Hl. 77.

Gatti, Emile (1846-1904). French crafts-
man and designer, After brilliandy
pursuing classical studies he worked
in the pottery and glass works of his
father. He took part in the Exhibition
of 1878, at which his technical mastery
and originality became known. He is
one of the chief exponents of Art
Nouveau, his specialities being glass
and furniture. See Hls. 36, 38, 74.

Garnier, Tony (1869-1948). French
architect, engineer and theorist. Gar-
nier won the Prix de Rome in 1&ygy.
While in laly he designed his
Industrielle, In iyog Edouard He
the new mayor of Lyons, Garn
native city. discovered him and en-
trusted to him the municipal works
deparament. See His. 153-6.

Gaupi ¥ Cornet, Anton (1852-1926)
The greatest of Art Nouveat archi
tects. Mose of his buildings are in

205

Barcelona and are mentioned in the
text. His chief carly works are the
Casa Vicens of 1878, and the Palau
Gitiell of 1884-9. The mature works
are Sta Coloma de Cervellé (begun
1898), the Giicll Park (begun 1900),
the upper parts of the transept facade
of the Sagrada Familia (begun 1903)
and the Casa Bathlé and Casa Mili
(begun 1905). He lived a modest,
retired life, wholly dedicated to his
work. See Ils. 51, 81-2, 84-6, 103-10.

Gaucuin, Paul (1848-1903). At first in
banking, he gave up his job to
devote himself wholly to painting.
He contributed to the last Impres-
sionist shows. In 1886 he made his
first stay at Pont-Aven. Anxious to
get away from modern civilization he
left for Martinique in 1887. During a
second stay at Pont-Aven with Emile
Bernard and others he developed a
style of tapestry-like two-dimen-
sionality with simple and unbroken
colours which sometimes comes near
to Art Nouveau, sometimes to the
Expressionism of the 1920s. He also
did sculpture of a deliberately primi-
tive kind. In 1888 he stayed for some
months at Arles with van Gogh. He
then returned to Pont-Aven, but in
1891 left for good to live on Tahiti. A
last visit to France (August 1893-
February 1895) preceded his final
stay in Tahiti which he left only for
the even greater solitude of the
Marquesas Islands where he died. See
Ils. 39-43.

Gitpert, Alfred (1854-1934). Sculptor.
Among his best-known works are
the Clarence Memorial at Windsor
(begun in 1892) and the Shaftesbury
Memorial Fountain (Eros), Piccadilly.
Already in the 1880s his style is near
Art Nouveau, but of a wholly per-
sonal variety. See Ills. 49-50.

Gimson, Ernest (1864-1920). English
craftsman and designer, studied archi-
tecture from 1881 to 1884. On the
advice of William Morris he joined
J.D. Sedding, remaining with him
from 1886 to 1888. From rgor on he

206

designed furniture and metalwork.
His designs were executed by a
group of craftsmen at Cirencester,
and subsequently in his own work-
shops — the Daneway House Work-
shops. See Hl. 123.

Groptus, Walter (Born 1883). Studied
architecture in Munich and Berlin
1903-7. In 1919 succeeded van de
Velde in Weimar at the art school,
which he converted into the famous
Bauhaus. The Bauhaus, with a teach-
ing staff composed of men like Klee,
Kandinsky, Feininger, Schlemmerand
Moholy-Nagy, rapidly became one
of the great centres of the International
Modern movement. It removed to
Dessau in 1925. Gropius left it in 1928
and was replaced by Mies van der
Rohe. In 1933 the school was dis-
banded, and its members dispersed in
the face of the Nazi storm. Gropius
went asa refugee first to England, then
to the USA, where he taught at
Harvard. Gropiusis one of the creators
of the style of the twentieth century,
which appears already complete in his
Fagus factory of 1911. He is also the
most impressive speaker of the social
duties and responsibilities of the archi-
tect. See Ill. 179.

Guimarp, Hector (1867-1942). French
architect and decorator. Guimard
adopted the ideas of Art Nouveau, of
which he was one of the chief
representatives in France. He was
responsible for the famous entrances
tothe Métro in Paris, and also designed
a number of houses in the west end of
Paris, chief among them the Castel
Béranger of 1897~8. See Ills. 97-102.

HENNEBIQUE, Francois (1842-1921).
French engineer. Was a contractor at
Courtrai and Brussels before he went
to Paris. From 1879-88 he worked on
the combination of iron and con-
crete, and in 1892 he took out patents.
He became the leading French de-
signer and contractor for reinforced
concrete. His factories of the nineties
are of straightforward post and lintel
construction, but the house he de-

signed for himself in 1904 is a folly
built to display the virtues of concrete.
See Hil. 149.

HoentscueL, Georges (1855-1915).
French designer and decorator.
Hoentschel was given the job of
designing the pavilion of the Union
Centrale des Arts Décoratifs at the
Exhibition of 1900. See Il. 67.

Horemann, Josef (1870-1956). Austrian
architect and interior designer. A
pupil of Otto Wagner, Hoffmann
was one of the founders of the Vienna
Secession. In 1903 he co-founded the
Wiener Werkstatte, and for the next
thirty years it was inspired by him.
He began in the Art Nouveau, but by
about 1900-1 he had turned away
from it to a style of squares and rec-
tangles, largely inspired by Mackin-
tosh. His Convalescent Home at
Purkersdorf of 1903 shows this style
fully developed, and his Palais Stoclet
in Brussels of 1905 demonstrated for
the first time that within the style of
the twentieth century, monumen-
tality and exquisite elegance could be
achieved. See Ills. 141, 163-5.

Hoasiro, = William (1854-1923).
American architect of the Chicago
School, trained by W. Le Baron
Jenney and then in the office of
Burnham & Root. In_ partnership
with Martin Roche he pioncered the

structural and expressive use of the:

steel frame in office buildings, de-
vising large broad windows with
fixed centre and movable sides for
better ventilation (Chicago win-
dows’). See HL. 24.

Horta, Victor (1861-1947). Belgian
architect. Horta built his first houses
in 1886, Three years later he began to
use iron in architectural construction,
which permitted him to introduce
curves into both his interiors and ex-
teriors. His key works are the Harel
Tassel of 1892, the Hétel Solvay of
1895, etc., and the Maison du Peuple
of 1896-9, all in Brussels. Later he
abandoned the Art Nouveau origin-
ality displayed by these buildings and

went over to classicism. See Ills. 88,
90-5.

JeNSEN, Georg (1866-1935). Danish gold-
smith, Jensen was also a sculptor and a
ceramic artist. After a stay in Paris
(1900-1) he started to make jewellery
in collaboration with Magnus Ballin.
About 1904 he began to concentrate
on silverware. His fame spread almost
at once, and had become international
by 1y10. See Its. 190-1,

Kut, Gustav (1862-1918). Austrian
painter. After conventional begin-
nings he suddenly, in 1899, appeared
with an Art Nouveau style distincely
his own. He took an active part in the
Vienna Secession, and became its
President. The relationship between
decoration and architecture remained
one of his major preoccupations and
his influence on the decorative arts in
Austria was considerable. In painting,
both Kokoschka and Schiele were
inspired by him. His magnum opus in
decoration is the mosaics in
Hoffmann’s Palais Stoclet. See Ils.
164, 166.

Koeprinc, Karl (1848-1914). German
painter and glass designer. After
studying chemistry he turned to
painting in 1869. From 1896 on he
contributed to Pas. He made a collec-
tion of Japanese objets d'art and took
inspiration from his collection for his
glass vases, ctc., which are his chief
title co fame. See Ill. 71.

LaproustE, Henri (1801-75). French
architect. He was awarded the Prix
de Rome at the age of twenty-three,
and spent five years in Italy. He
became the leader of the Rationalist
school as opposed to the Academy.
His use of iron exposed inside the
Bibliothéque Ste-Genevitve in Paris
in 1843-$0 heralded a revolution in
architecture. See HE 5.

Latiqur, René (1860-1945). Freneh
jeweller and glass-worker. Lalique
studied at the Beaux-Arts in Paris
where he founded his glass workshops.
His forms and designs were based on
floral motifs. He collaborated with

207

Samuel Bing. See Ills. 63, 64, 66.

Lemmen, Georges (1865-1916). Belgian
painter and graphic designer, son of
an architect. In 1899 joined Les
Viner, then the Libre Esthétique, and
designed posters as well as exhibiting
his own work. He collaborated with
van de Velde and van Rysselberghe
in the revival of decorative arts in
Belgium. See fl, 57.

Lernasy, William Richard (1857-1931).
English architect. Wrote books of
great importance on the theory and
history of architecture. He was re-
sponsible with Sir George Frampton
for the establishment of the Central
School of Arts and Crafts, whose
principal he was from 1893 to Igi1.
He designed the Eagle Insurance
Building in Birmingham in 1900, and
the church at Brockhampton in 1900—
2. See Hil. 121.

Levemcé, Ernest Baptiste. French crafts~
man in ceramics and glass. He was a
pupil of Rousseau. In 1889 he won a
Gold Medal at the Exposition Univer-
selle. See Ul. 37.

Loos, Adolf (1870-1933). Austrian
architect. A pupil of Otto Wagner,
he studied in Dresden and in the
United States. From 1897 onwards he
adopted a style which eschewed all
ornament and sought to obtain its
effects by the articulation of planes
and the use of beautiful materials.
Loos was not a successful architect,
and his buildings are few. After 1922—
7 he lived in Paris. See Hl. 167.

Lutyens, Sir Edwin Landseer (1869—
1944). English architect. His early
architecture was influenced by Shaw,
Voysey and the Arts and Crafts but
possesses a boldness entirely his own.
From 1906 he turned to Palladianism
and Neo-Georgianism. Architect of
New Delhi, the British Embassy
building in Washington and the
Cenotaph in Whitehall, See It. 118.

MACDONALD, the sisters. Margaret
(1865-1933) and Frances (1874-1921).
English craftswomen. Margaret Mac-
donald was a designer and worker

208

in metals, stained glass and em-
broidery. In tgoo she married Charles
Rennie Mackintosh and collaborated
with hin in much of his work. Both
sisters trained at the Glasgow School
of Art, and Frances was a teacher
there from 1907 onwards. She worked
sometimes alone and sometimes in
collaboration with her sister. In 1899
she married JH. McNair and col-
laborated with him in the designing
of furniture and stained glass. See Ills.
127, 129.

Macxintosu, Charles Rennie (1868-
1928). Scottish architect and designer.
Studied at the Glasgow School of
Art. Assistant and later partner in the
firm of Honeyman and Keppie. The
commission to build the Glasgow
School of Art which he was given in
1897 made his fame. His principal
works arc all between 1897 and about
1905. They are Windyhill, Kilmacolm
(1899-1901), Hill House, Helensburgh
(1902-4), tea rooms for Miss Cranston
(1896-1911) and the Scotland Street
School (1904-5). Mackintosh and his
group exhibited in Vienna in 1900
and in Turin in 1902. See Ills. 127-8,
130-9, 142-3.

Mackmvrno, Arthur Heygate (1851-
1942), English architect and designer.
Mackmurdo travelled with Ruskin to
Italy. In 1882 he founded the Century
Guild, and two years later he also
founded the journal Hobby Horse.
From ¢.1883 he designed furniture,
wallpaper, textiles and metalwork. In
1904 he abandoned architecture in
order to devote himself completely
to social theories. See Ills. 27, 29-30,
52-3, 111-13.

Matiart, Robert (1872-1940). Swiss
engineer, inventor of the ‘mushroom
piers’ which unite in one member the
function of load and support. In
1y01 he began to apply his principles
to the bridges that made him famous.
See fll. 158.

Majorette, Louis (1859-1929). French
furniture designer, After studying in
Paris, Majorelle took over the cera-

mics workshop of his father. The
success of Gallé led him to abandon
period imitation for original work.
His most interesting pieces date from
around the time of the Exhibition of
1900 in Paris. See Hl. 75.

Morris, William (1834-96). English
designer, craftsman, poet and social
reformer, the fountain-head of the
rebirth of the crafts and of the sense of
the social responsibilities of artist and
architect. Morris was initially in-
spired by Ruskin. He began to take
an interest in craft and design when
he built a house for himself in 1859.
His own firm was founded in 1861,
and in 1877 he started on his long
series of lectures on art and social
problems. His influence was immense.
The last of the crafts he tried his hand
at was the art of the book (Kelmscott
Press, founded 1890). See Ils. 8, 10-
12, 29, 72.

Nyroe, Martin (1849-1925). Danish
architect. Nyrop used traditional
motifs but experimented with the
use of cast iron. See Ill. 120.

Osrist, Hermann (1863-1927). Swiss
sculptor and designer. First studied
science and then art, including sculp-
ture. In 1892 he started an embroidery
workshop in Florence and moved ic
to Munich in 1894. He was one of the
founders of the Vereinigte Werk-
statten fiir Kunst und Handwerk in
Munich. His works are few but
influential. In the field of sculpture
the most important piece is the model
for an all-but-abstract. monument
done c.1900. See fil. 54.

Oxpricn, Joseph Maria (1867-1908).
Austrian architect, craftsman and
book-designer. Travelled to Rome
and Tunisia, then studied with Otto
Wagner in Vienna. Co-founder, with
Klimt, of the Secession whose build-
ing he designed. Called by the Grand
Duke of Hesse to Darmstadt, where
he designed the Mathildenhohe artists’
colony. See Hl. 149.

Oup, Jacobus Johannes Pieter (1890-
1963). Dutch architect, member of

De Stijl. He specialized in housing
schemes (e.g. as City Architect of
Rotterdam, 1918) and pioneered the
International Style, admiring Ber-
lage’s functionalism and truth to
materials. Later he renounced serict
functionalism, bute remained con-
cerned with human needs in archi-
tecture. See Ill. 188.

Parker, Barry. See
Raymond.

Paxton, Sir Joseph (1801-65). English
horticulturalist, In 1826 he became
superintendent of the Duke of Devon-
shire’s gardens ac Chatsworth. In
1836 he began to erect a great con-
servatory 300 fect in length, which
was completed in 1840, and enabled
Paxton in 1850 to design for the
Great Exhibition the Crystal Palace,
a building entirely of glass and iron
and the first ever erected by the
technique of prefabrication. See Ill. 1.

Perret, the brothers Auguste (1874-
1954) and Gustave (1875-1952).
French builders, ic. contractors for
architectural work. They were the
first to use reinforced concrete in the
architecture of private buildings, and
they developed its use both struc-
turally and aesthetically. They kept
away, however, from any utihzation
of the possibilines of concrete for
wide spans and bold cantilevering.
Their vision of architecture was still
that of the classical styles of post and
lintel. The principal works are the
house in the rue Franklin of 1y02.
the garage in the rue de Ponthicu of
1905, the church of Notre Dame at
Raincy of 1922-3 and the new build-
ings at Le Havre erected from 1945
onwards as part of a plan of recon-
struction. See flls. 150-2.

Prior, Edward Schroder (1852-1932).
English architect, the most original
in the Arts and Crafts group. Pro-
fessor at Cambridge from rygi2 to
1932. He also produced same out-
standing books on English medieval
architecture, See Hh 147.

Provve, Victor (1858 1943)

Unwin, Sir

French

209

painter, engraver, sculptor and decora-
tor, Prouvé studied in Nancy and
Paris and subsequently worked for
Gallé. After Gallé’s death he was
appointed President of the Nancy
School where he continued his work
until after the First World War. Sce
Ills. 62, 68, 73.

RicHarpson, Henry Hobson (1838-86).
American architect, studied at the
Beaux-Arts in Paris and worked for
Labrouste before returning to the
United States. He built churches,
offices, public buildings and houses in
a massive free Romanesque style (the
major exception is the shingled
Stoughton House at Cambridge,
Mass.). Office buildings such as the
Marshall Field Wholesale Store in
Chicago (1885-7) influenced the
Chicago School. See Hl. 20.

RIEMERSCHMID, Richard (1868-1957).
German painter, then architect. In
1897 he was one of the founders of the
Vereinigte Werkstatten fiir Kunst und
Handwerk and he took part in the Paris
Exhibition of 1900. He was Director
of the School for Decorative Arts in
Munich from 1912 to 1924, and in
1926 became Director of the Cologne
Werkschule. His mostimportant archi-
tectural achievement was the interior
of the Munich Schauspielhaus (1901);
his designs for furniture are among
the most progressive of their day. See
Ils. 80, 168-9, 170-1, 198.

Ruetvetp, Gerrit Thomas (born 1888).
Dutch architect and furniture de-
signer. Trained first as a cabinet-
maker, then as an architect, he joined
De Stijl and throughout his career
Maintained an interest in interior
design. See Ills. 186-7.

Rocne, Martin (1855-1927). American
architect, trained in Chicago by W.
Le Baron Jenney. As partner of
William Holabird (q.v.) he specialized
in interiors. See Ill, 24.

Ronpr, Johan (1856-1935). Danish de-
signer. At first a painter, and con-
siderably influenced by Maurice Denis,
he later turned to designing furniture

210

and silverware. Asa collaborator with
Jensen (q.v.), he had a decisive in-
fluence on Danish design. See Ils. 189,
igt.

Roussrav, Eugéne (1827-91). French
craftsman in ceramics and glass. Rous-
seau’s works are far less known than
they deserve to be. What he did in the
mid-cighties is among the most
daringly novel work anywhere in
Europe. See Ill. 34, 35-

Sant'Ex1a, Antonio (1880-1916). Italian
architect and theorist. His early work
was influenced by the Vienna School.
He was fascinated by the city and
exhibited his vision of the future, the
Cittd Nuova, at Milan in 1914. A
socialist, he mever fully shared the
aims of Futurism, with which his
name is associated. He was killed in
the First World War, and only one
of his designs was ever built, a house
in Como. See Ills. 192-3.

Sauvace, Henri (1873-1932). French
architect. Sauvage collaborated with
Frantz Jourdain on the Samaritaine
building and was responsible for
numerous modem buildings in Paris,
including the house at no, 26 rue
Vavin of 1912-13. See Ill. 194.

SeHRING, Bernhard (1855-1932). Ger-
man architect. Sehring is primarily
known for the theatres he built, for
instance those of Diisseldorf, Bielefeld
and Berlin, but his most interesting
building is the Tietz Store in the
Leipziger Strasse in Berlin of 1898,
with its expanses of sheer glass. See
Ill. 96.

Suaw, Richard Norman (1831-1912).
Side by side with Webb the chief
reformer of domestic architecture in
England. His style was inspired by the
English seventcenth-century — ver-
nacular of the Home Counties, by
seventeenth-century Dutch architec-
ture and the William and Mary and
Queen Anne styles in England. His
influence was wide and wholesome.
His style was complete by 1866-7
(Glen Andred, also Bingley church),
but the climax was in the mid-seven-

ties with New Zealand Chambers in
the City of London, his own house in
Hampstead, Swan House in Chelsea
and such country houses as Adcote.
About 1890 he changed allegiance and
went classical and at the same time
grander than he had been before
{Chesters 1891, Piccadilly Hotel 1905).
See Ills. 14, 16, 17.

Suttivan, Louis (1856-1924). American
architect. Sullivan studied at the Ecole
des Beaux-Arts in Paris under Vaud-
temer. He was a true precursor of
modern architecture, though his
stature was recognized only after his
death. Frank Lloyd Wright was
trained under him from 1887 to 1893.
Sullivan’s key works are the Audi-
torium Building in Chicago (1887-9),
memorable chiefly for its feathery
ornament, and the cellular Wain-
wright Building at Se Louis (1890)
and Guaranty Building at Buffalo
(1894-5). The acme is the Carson
Pirie Scott store in Chicago of 1899-
1904. See Ills. 23, 25~6, 182.

Taut, Bruno (1880-1938). German
architect. His exhibition building of
1914 is by far his most daring work.
Later, for a short time, he designed in
the spirit of the then potent German
Expressionism. Soon, however, he
fell in with the Berlin group of those
believing in the International Modern
(housing estates, Berlin, especially the
Britz estate). He was made city
architect at Magdeburg and there
intreduced strong colours in the
facades of terrace houses. In 1932 he
was invited to Moscow, and from
there went to Japan, finally was
professor at Istanbul. See Ills. 180-1.

Tetrorb, Thomas (1757-1834). English
civil engineer. The son of a shepherd
and first apprenticed to a stonemason,
he later became Shropshire County
Surveyor. He is famous as the builder
of canals, aqueducts, roads and bridges
both in England and Scotland. In
1820 he was made the first president
of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
See Hl. 3.

Tutany, Louis Comfort (1848-1933).
The most famous of American crafts-
men, designers and entrepreneurs in
the Arts and Crafts. His father owned
a store famous for elegance and in-
corporating a silverware department.
The son set up on his own in 1879. He
quickly became famous for interior
decoration, stained glass (the Tiffany
Glass Company was incorporated in
1886), and then his exquisite Art
Nouveau Favrile glass, introduced
about 1894 and very soon handled by
Bing in Paris. While Favrile is wholly
original, Tiffany’s interiors show the
influence of Morris and of the Early
Christian and Italian Romanesque
styles. See Hf. 70.

Unwin, Sir Raymond (1863~1940) and
Parker, Barry (1867-1947). English
architects and town planners. In 1904
they were commissioned to design
Letchworth, the first of the garden-
cities, and in 1907 the Hampstead
Garden Suburb. Raymond Unwin's
book Town Planning in Practice greatly
influenced his own and the next
generation. See Ill. 197.

Vauin, Eugéne (1856-1922). French
designer of furniture and facades (for
the architect Biet). Vallin served his
apprenticeship at Nancy. He pro-
duced a good deal for Gothic and
neo-Gothic churches, decidedly under
the influence of Viollet-le-Duc. In
189s he freed himself from period
imitation and turned to the Art
Nouveau of Nancy. His furniture
keeps a balance between emphasis on
abstract curvesand motits from nature
See Hl 73

VaN ve Vetve, Henri (1863-1957). Van
de Velde began in Belgium as a
painter, but around 1893 he turned to
architecture and craftsmanship. In
1896 Bing asked him to furnish a
room in his shop ‘L’Art Nouveau’,
and in 1897 he exhibited at Dresden
His success in Germany was such that
he settled there in 1899. In 1901 he was
called co Weimar as consultant to the
Grand Duke. In 1906 he became head

201

ofthe Weimar School of Applied Arts
which later became the Bauhaus. His
principal works are the Werkbund
Theatre in 1914 in Cologne, and the
Krovier-Miller Museum at Otterlo
(1937-33). He is equally important
as a theoretical writer. He began to
put down his theories in 1894 and had
by then already demonstrated his
abstract, linear, tensile style in book
decoration. His furniture has the same
qualities. See ills. 44, 53, 58, 78.

VIOLLET-LE-Duc, Eugéne Emmanuel
(1814-79). French architect and
theorist. He was the leading European
restorer of historic buildings, but also
designed churches and flats. His writ-
ings were less traditionalist and far
more influential than his work. See
Hl. 52.

Voysey, Charles F. Annesley (1857-
1941). Voysey is the most important
English architect and designer of the
generation after Morris. He was a
pupil of Seddon and then of Devey.
In the eighties he designed wallpapers
and textiles; from 1889 houses. With-
in ten years he had established him~
self as a favourite architect of country
houses, all of them comfortable,
informal, and only in the most general
way still adhering to historicism, i.e.
the Tudor vernacular. Voysey’s de-
signs, carried out by factories, not by
craftsmen, are of great freshness and
crispness and had much influence on
the Continent. See Ills 55-6, 114-6,
122, 125.

Wacner, Otto (1841-1918). Appointed
Professor at the Vienna Academy in
1894, Wagner wasalready wellknown
as an architect inspired by the Italian
Renaissance. His book Moderne Archi-
tektur was based on his inaugural
lecture and became a classic of the
architectural revolution. His build-
ings between 1898 and 1904 are in a
heavy Art Nouveau, inspired by the
Baroque and to a certain extent by his
pupil Olbrich (Vienna Metro, Hof-
pavillon and Karlsplatz stations, and
unexecuted designs for public build-

iS)

12

ings). In ty04 he abandoned lush
curves, and in the Vienna Postal
Savings Bank of 1905 achieved one of
the masterpieces of early twentieth-
century rattonalism, See Hs. 161-2,

Wess, Philip (1831-191). English archi-
tect and designer. Red House and
Webb’s country houses after it, such
as Joldwyns of 1873, Smeaton Manor
of 1878, Standen of 1892, the larger
and more idiosyncratic Rounton
Grange of 1872-6, and Clouds of
1881t~gi, had as much influence as
Shaw’s houses, both in England and
abroad. Webb built one church,
Brampton in Cumberland, before
1874. He also designed furniture and
metalwork. See Ills 8, 10, 15, 72.

WHuisTLer, James Abbot McNeill (1834-
1903). American painter. He was
trained in Paris, and after 1859 lived
mainly in London. Whistler was
greatly influenced by Japanese art,
which he collected, and his interior
decoration schemes - probably in-
spired by his friend Edward Godwin —
were revolutionary in their simplicity
and use of plain, pale colours. He
decorated Oscar Wilde’s house in
Tite Street and, more elaborately, the
‘Peacock Room’ of the Leyland house.
His own house in Tite Street, by
Edward Godwin (1878) was strikingly
original with an asymmetrical white-
painted exterior and yellow and white
rooms. Inhis paintings, which shocked
Ruskin, Whistler combined Impres-
sionism with echoes of Japanese wood-
cuts. See Ills 28-9.

Wuite, Stanford (1853-1906). Ameri-
can architect. Worked under H.H.
Richardson in the designing of Trinity
Church in Boston. Joined McKim
and Mead and was the most brilliant
designer in the partnership. See Iii, 21.

Wiener, René (1856-1939). A member
of a family of Nancy bookbinders
and a bookbinder himself. He aban-
doned period imitation and applied
the process of pyrogravure to the
working of leather, collaborating for
instance with Toulouse-Lautrec and

Victor Prouvé. His best years are the
nineties. See {lls 61, 62.

WiLtumseN, Jens Ferdinand (1863-
1958). Danish painter and sculptor.
During his stays in Paris (1888-9,
1890-4) Willumsen was powerfully
influenced by Gauguin and Bernard
in their Pont-Aven style, and he
exhibited with the Independents. In
1890 he met Redon, and that also left
its mark on Willumsen’s work. See
Tih. 45.

Wricut, Frank Lloyd (1869-1959).
American architect. Wright was in
the office of Louis Sullivan from 1887
to 1893 and then, in the first decade of
the new century, designed his most
important buildings, the Larkin Build-
ing at Buffalo (1906), the Unity
Church at Oak Park, Chicago (1906),
and houses such as the Martin House,
Buffalo (1906) and the Coonley (1907)
and Robie (1909) Houses at Chicago.
Two publications of his work in
Berlin in 1910 and 1911 inaugurated
his influence on Europe. His houses

are characterized by low spreading
plans, cantilevered roofs and inter-
penetration of the internal spaces. His
largest buildings up to the twenties
were the Imperial Hotel at Tokyo
(1916-22) and Midway Garden, Chi-
cago (1914). Here a passion for
angular, abstract ornament and fanci-
ful detail comes to the fore, and was to
dominate much of his later work
(Hollyhock House, Los Angeles 1920,
Price Tower, Bartlesville £953-6). He
rarely fits into the pattern of the so-
called International Modern (Falling
Water, 1936). The most prominent
buildings of his old age are the two
for the Johnson Wax Company at
Racine, Wis. (1936-9, 1950) and the
Guggenheim Muscum in New York
(1956-9), a monument to its architect
rather than a functional museum.
Frank Lloyd Wright’s imagination
was of truly Welsh fertilicy, and
remains an inspiration to those who
are dissatisfied with rationalism. See
ls 183-5.

Photographic Acknowledgments

Acrofilms Ltd. 195; Amigos de Gaudi 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 106, 108, 110; Wayne
Andrews 21; Architectural Association, London (photo Yerbury) 160; Architectural
Press, London 1; Archives Photographiques, Paris 5; Arts Council of Great Britain
9; Jay W. Baxtresser 184; courtesy Mrs M. Bodelsen 39, 40, 41, 45, 47; Société des
Entreprises Boussiron, Paris 157; British Council (photos Wickham) 27, 32, 113,
130, 132, 133, 134, 135; British Rail 6; Cauvin 46; Chevojon 7, 145, 194; courtesy
Prof. Carl W. Condit 24; Conservatoire National des Arts ct Méticrs, Paris 93;
Country Life 4, 117, 118; John Craven, 98, 102, 148, 150, 152; Jean Desmarteau 97,
100, 101; H.G. Dorrett 114; courtesy Prof. Henry-Russell Hitchcock 20; Quentin
Hughes 197; Jacqueline Hyde 48, 143; Benno Keysselitz 37, 38, 56, 61, 62, 67, 73, 83;
Service des Halles et Marchés, Lyon 156; Eric de Maré 18, 49, 116, 121, Mas $1,
104, 10$, 107, 109; Giinther Mchling $4, 171; K.G. Meyer 140, 161; Studio Minders
95, 163, 164, 165; Morian 94; Jan Nairn 14; National Monuments Record, London
8, 15 (photo Quentin Lloyd), 16, 17, 22, 131; Richard Nickel 25, 183; Pierre
d’Otreppe 90, 91, 92; Reiffenstein 167; Royal Danish Ministry of Forcign Affairs
(photo Lilian Zangenberg) 120; Royal Institute of British Architects, London $5;
Sanderson & Dixon 115; Walter Scott 3; Edwin Smith 2, 146; Dr Franz Stoedtner
87, 89, 179, 180, 198; Unilever Merseyside Limited 196; United States Information
Service, Paris 23; Bildarchiv der Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna 162;
John Webb (Brompton Studio) 72.

213
