BOOK Reyner Banham.pdf
Introduction—the machine age

THIS BOOK Was conceived and written in the late years of the Nineteen-
fifties, an epoch that has variously been called the Jet Age, the Detergent
Decade, the Second Industrial Revolution. Almost any label that identifies
anything worth identifying in the period will draw attention to some
aspect of the transformation of science and technology, for these transfor-
mations have powerfully affected human life, and opened up new paths of
choice in the ordering of our collective destiny. Our accession to almost
unlimited supplies of energy is balanced against the possibility of making
our planet uninhabitable, but this again is balanced, as we stand at the
threshold of space, by the growing possibility of quitting our island earth
and letting dawn roots elsewhere. Again, our explorations into the nature
of information have made it-possible, on the one hand, to set electronics to
work to take the drudgery out of routine thought, and on the other hand
to tailor human thinking to suit the needs of some narrow-minded power-
élite.

These, of course, are the grand prospects that affect economics, morality
and sociology, in the same remote and statistical way as did the perfection
of cavalry, the growth of feudal organisations, the rise of money economy.
But, unlike those developments of the past, which left the objects of daily
life, the hierarchy of the family and the structure of sociable intercourse
almost untouched, the technical revolutions of our own time strike us with
infinitely greater force because the small things of life have been visibly
and audibly revolutionised as well.

Even a man who does not possess an electric razor is ikely—in the
Westernised world at least—to dispense some previously inconceivable
product, such as an aerosol shaving cream, from an equally unprecedented
pressurised container, and accept with equanimity the fact that he can
afford to throw away, regularly, cutting-edges that previous generations
would have nursed for years. Even a housewife who does not possess a
washing machine dispenses synthetic detergent from synthetic plastic
packs on to synthetic fabrics whose quality and performance makes the
jeatously-guarded secrets of silk seer trivial. A teen-ager, curled up with a

a.

transistorised, printed-circuit radio, or boudoir gramophone, may hear a
music that literally did not exist before it was committed to tape, repro-
duced at a level of quality that riches could not have bought a decade or so
ago. The average automobile of today, running on such roads as have been
especially contrived for it, provides transport more sumptuous in vehicles
more gorgeous than palanquin-borne emperors knew how to desire.

Many technologies have contributed to this domestic revolution, but
most of therm make their point of impact on us in the form of small machines
—shavers, clippers and hair-dryers; radio, telephone, gramophone, tape
recorder and television; mixers, grinders, automatic cookers, washing
machines, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, polishers. ...A housewife alone,
often disposes of more horse-power today than an industrial worker did at
the beginning of the century. This is the sense in which we live in a
Machine Age. We have lived in an Industrial Age for nearly a century and
a half now, and may well be entering a Second Industrial Age with the
current revolution in control mechanisms. But we have already entered the
Second Machine Age, the age of domestic electronics and synthetic chem-
istry, and can look back on the First, the age of power from the mains and
the reduction of machines to human scale, as a period of the past,

Although the earhest stirrings of that First Machine Age must have
appeared with the availability of coal-gas for lighting and heating, the
mechanism of light and heat remained @ flame, as it had been from the
Stone Age onwards. Mains electricity made a decisive alteration here, one
of the most decisive in the history of domestic technology. In addition, it
brought small, woman-controlled machinery into the home, notably the
vacuum cleaner. Electrical techniques brought the telephone as well, and
for the first time domestic and sociable communication did not depend on
the sending of written or remembered messages. The portable typewriter
put a machine under the hands of poets, the first gramophones made music
a domestic service rather than a social ceremony.

Alt these machines are still with us in the Second Machine Age, supple-
mented and improved by more recent technological advances, but there is
a more than quantitative difference between the two ages. In the Second,
highly developed mass production methods have distributed electronic
devices and synthetic chemicals broadcast over a large part of society—
television, the symbolic machine of the Second Machine Age, hag be-
come a means of mass-communication dispensing popular entertainment.
In the First, however, only cmema was available to a broad public, whose
home life was otherwise barely touched and it was in upper middle-class
homes that the First Machine Age made its greatest impact, the homes that
could afford these new, convenient and expensive aids to gracious living,
the homes that tend to breed architects, painters, poets, journalists, the
creators of the myths and symbols by which a culture recognises itself.

Thus, it was into the hands of an élite, rather than the masses, that the

symbolic machine of that First Machine Age was delivered, the automobile,
It was more than a symbol of power, it was also, for most of that éite,
a heady taste of a new kind of power.) One of the uncommented curiosities of
the early part of the Industrial Age is that, in spite of its massive depen-
dence on mechanical power, few of its éfite, if any, had any personal experi-
ence of controlling that power. They could buy the use of it with money,
and ride in its great ships and famous expresses, but they did not dirty
their hands with the controls, That was left to a separate, working-class
élite of ships’ engineers, engine-drivers and so forth, who retired into the
middie-classes when their service was complete.

But, with the coming of purchasable motor-cars, it became possible, and
fashionable, for the opinion-forming classes to own and personally control
units of motive power of up to sixty, or even a hundred horse-power.
Although they brought ever into this new situation certain horse-and-
groom social usages, the psychological effect was a revolution that struck
deep. Many of thern were clearly aware that the men who made and serviced
their cars were of an utterly different breed and mind to those who had bred
and cared for their horses. Over and above this, the jump in speed from a
spanking twenty-five miles an hour to the roaring sixties, with the magic
century an ever approaching goal for the really rich and determined,
brought in changes of experience that were qualitative, not merely quanti-
tative—the dynamics of a fast-moving car are different in kind to the
dynamics of even a race-horse. The Man Muitiplied by the Motor, to use
Marinetti’s phrase, was a different kind of man to the horse-and-buggy men
who had ruled the world since the time of Alexander the Great.

Under these changed circumstances, that barrier of incomprehension
that had stood between thinking men and their mechanised environment
all through the nineteenth century, in the mind of Marx as much as in the
mind of Morris, began to crumble, Men whose means of moving ideas from
place to place had been revolutionised at their writing desks by the type~

1 John Davidson, Scots chemist and journalist, whe died in 1909, expreased the
élite aspect of motoring more explicitly than any other writer of the time, and
contrasted it with the mass experience of railway travel in a late poem entitled

The Testament of Sir Stmon Sanplex concerning Automodilism, of which the following
lines are typical:

Class, mass and mob for fifty years and more
Had ali to travel in the jangling roar

Of railways, the nomadic caravan

That stifled individual mind in man,

Till automobilismm arose at last!

And things that socialism supposed extinct,
Degree, nobility and noble strife,

A form, a style, a privacy im life

Will re-appear: and, crowning nature’a plan
The individual and the gentleman

In England reassume his lawful place. . . .

writer and the telephone, could no longer treat the world of technology
with hostility or indifference, and if there is a test that divides the men
from the boys in say, 1912, it is their attitude to Ruskin. Men whose view
of the aima of art and the function of design were as diverse as could be,
nevertheless united in their hatred of ce déplorable Ruskin,

‘The human chain of Pioneers of the Modern Movement that extends
back from Gropius to William Morris, and beyond him to Ruskin, Pugin
and William Blake, does not extend forward from Gropius. The precious
vessel of handicraft aesthetics that had been passed from hand to hand,
was dropped and broken, and no one has bothered to pick up the pieces,
When Gropius, in the Bauhaus Proclamation of 1919, talked of handicrafts
he was, effectively, talking to himself. His re-establishment as one of the
leaders of Modern design after about 1923 was as the head of a school
devoted to Machine Age architecture and the design of machine products,
employing 2a Machine Age aesthetic that had been worked out by other
men in other places,

Naturally that Machine Age aesthetic was not an entirely new creation
—the men who wrought it came to the First Machine Age bowed down with
two-thousand years’ culture on their backs, but the very minimum of the
new mental equipment needed to handle their new environment. At one
extreme, the Futurists proposed to dump their cultural load, and rush
forward equipped only with a new sensibility; at the other extreme, men
like Perret and Garnier in France felt that the new should be, in Paul
Valéry's phrase, subject to the old, or at least the outlines of the old.
Between Futurist dynamism and this Academic caution the theory and
design of the architecture of the First Machine Age were evolved, Whether
those theories, and that architecture were what we, looking back from the
Second Machine Age, would regard as proper, or even adequate, to their
situation, is a question which will be held over until the last chapter, after
the events and theories of the period have been described, Nevertheless,
while we yet lack a body of theory proper to our own Machine Age, we are
still free-wheeling along with the ideas and aesthetics left over from the first,
The reader may therefore, at any turn, find among these relics of a past
as economically, socially, and technologically dead as the city-states of
Greece, ideas that he is using every day of his life. Should he do so, may
he ask himself two things; firstly, are any of his ideas as up-to-date as he
thinks them to be, this is the Second Machine Age not the First; and
secondly, how out-moded in truth are the ideas he dismisses as mere
fashions of the Jazz Decades, for one Machine Age is more like another
Machine Age than any other epoch the world has ever known. The cultural
revolution that took place around 1912 has been superseded, but it has not
been reversed,

Section one

This printing differs from earlier versions in the addition to the bibliographies
of a few substantial works of scholarship that have come to my notice since
the original text was completed. So far, thetr content does not seem to require
any major revisions of the text, but the reader is enjoined to refer ta any books
listed in the bibliographies with dates later than 1957—2ost of them should
be avatlable in specialised architectural iibraries—in order to bring himself up
to date.

Footnotes are given only for quotations fram publications of subsidiary import-
ance, and the main works are listed in a bibliography at the beginning of the
section in which they are discussed,

PREDISPOSING CAUSES: ACADEMIC AND RATIONALIST WRITERS,
IQoo0-Igi4
Guadet, J: Eléments et Théories de P Architecture, Paris, 1902,
Blanc, C: Grammaire des Arts de Dessin, Paris, 1867.
Ferran, A: Philosophie de la Composition Architecturale, Paris, 1955.
Choisy, A: Histotre de ? Architecture, Paris, 1899.
Morancé and Badovici: L’Gtuvre de Tony Garnier, Paris, 1938.
Garner, T: Une Cité Industrielle, Paris, 1918.
Jamot, B: Auguste Perret et? Architecture du Beton Armé, Brussels, 19277.
Collins, P: Concrete—The Vision of a New Architecture, London, 1959.
Lethaby, W. R: Form in Ctvtlization, London, 1922,
Architecture, London, 1g11.
Goodhart-Rendel, H: English Architecture since the Regency, London, 1953.
Scott, G: The Architecture of Humanism, London, 1914.
Lindner and Steinmetz: Die Ingenteurbauten und ihre Entwicklung, Leipzig,
1923.
Muthesius, H: Stilerchitehtur und Baukunst, Berlin, 1902.
Pevsner, N: Pioneers of the Modern Movement, London, (1st eda.) 1936
(for a brief account of the Deutscher Werkbund).
Loos, A: Trotzdem, Innsbruck, 1930
(for Ornament und Verbrechen, Architektur and excerpts from
Das Andere).
Periodicals
Die Form, VIL, 1932
(for a fuller account of the beginnings of the Deutscher Werkbund, by
Peter Bruckmann).
Jahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes, 1912 and 1913
(for Muthestus’s Wo steken wir, Grosz's Probleme der Ornamente, essays
by Muthesius, Gropius and others on factory design, etc.).

4: The academic tradition and
the concept of elementary composition

WHILE A SERIES OF revolutionary gestures around rgro, largely connected
with the Cubist and Futurist movements, were the main point of departure
for the development of Modern architecture, there were also a number of
particular predisposing causes that helped to guide the mainstream of
development into the channels through which it flowed in the Twenties,
These predisposing causes were all of nineteenth-century origin, and may
be loosely grouped under three heads: firstly, the sense of an architect’s
responsibility to the society in which he finds himself, an idea of largely
English extraction, from Pugin, Ruskin, and Morris, which was summed up
in an organisation founded in 1907, the Deutscher Werkbund: secondly,
the Rationalist, or structural approach to architecture, again of English
extraction, from Willis, but elaborated in France by Viollet-le-Duc, and
codified in Auguste Choisy’s magisterial Histoire at the very end of the
century, though the parailel tradition in Germany has no major exponent
after Gottfried Semper; and, thirdly, the tradition of academic instruction,
world wide in distribution, but owing most of its energy and authority to
the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, from which there emerged, just after the
turn of the century, Julien Guadet’s compendious summary of his course of
professorial lectures—though again no equivalent work appeared ia Ger-
many at that time.

The attitude of those who were to become the masters of Modern
architecture to these traditions from the past was apt to be equivocal. The
Werkbund and its members were the object of suspicien in some quarters,
though most of the younger architects accepted the moral imperatives
bound up in it. The Rationalist attitude was held in high regard, yet
effectively repudiated by most of them, and the academic tradition was
generally vilified, yet many of the ideas it embodied were taken over by
them.

The last circumstance makes the evaluation of Guadet’s contribution to
modern theory dithcult to assess. Those who rejected the academic disci-
pline did so because they felt it to be hostile to their conception of archi-
tecture, which they held to be functional, scientific and divorced from

stylistic considerations, Yet, on the evidence of his five volumes of Eléments
et Théortes de? Architecture, Guadet—the very embodiment of the academy
—was as functional, scientific and un-stylistic as they. Conversely, they tn
their turn, while repudiating the ‘false standards of the academies’,
accepted many academic ideas without knowing where they had come from.
Thus Gropius in 1923, having criticised the academies for not nurturing
aesthetic science, goes on in the succeeding paragraphs to make use of a
number of aesthetic concepts that resemble those of French academic
origin.?

This state of affairs was, to some extent, the product of specialisation
and compartmentation inside the academies themselves, and also of certain
silences that were observed m academic teachmg on subjects held to be
too obvious or too sacred for discussion. On the first count, one must note
that many of the academic ideas accepted by architects came not from the
architectural side of Beaux-Arts instruction, but from the painterly. The
Grammaire des Arts de Dessin, written by Charles Blanc, the librarian of
the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, and published in 1867, had become part of the
racial sub-conscious, so to speak, of many tribes of creative artista in the
Western world and its ideas can be paralleled (e.g. in Germany) even where
they had no direct influence. Its emphasis on technical methods of expres-
sion (brushwork, colour, camposition, etc.) as against subject-matter, in
painting—128 pages of the former, only 19 of the latter—helped to pave
the way for the rise of Abstract art. It may well have helped to pave the way
for Guadet as well: Blanc’s insistence on the ordonnance of a painting as its
prime ineans of expression, was echoed over and over again by Guadet’s
insistence on the importance of compostfton in architecture,

Again, Blanc’s relative lack of interest in subject-matter, is matched in
Guadet by a complete absence of interest in style. This 1s one of the con-
spicuous silences in the Eléments et Théories; the other concerns axial
planning. Guadet’s attitude to both subjects, both so crucial to academic
teaching, seems to be a product of his own intimate and lifelong entangle-
ment with that teaching system, He became Professor in 1886, after fifty-
two years of blameless academic respectability, suitably adorned with
numerous firsts, medals and the Prix de Rome. His own master had been
Henri Labrouste, the ‘rogue’ academician of the middle of the century,
and through him Guadet was a link in an unbroken academic chain that
went right back to the early days of the nineteenth century, and to the
heyday of neo-Classical architecture in France. So truly did the tradition
run through him, that his own insistence on cornposition, the assembly of a
building from its component volumes, is only an echo of J. N. L. Durand
saying, in 19218

‘See chapter zo,
*#On page 6 of his Partte Graphique (Paris, 1821), a supplementary volume to
his well-known Précis (Paris, 1809) which had a wide distribution in Europe,

Any complete building whetever is not, and cannot be, anything but the result
of the assembly and putting together (composition) of a preater or lesser
number of parts.

But the specific mode of putting the parts together is something that
Guadet barely discusses—it occupies one chapter out of eight in the
second book of the first of the five volumes of Elgments et Théortes, is not
very informative and is completely swamped by the mass of practical infor-
mation contained in the other four volumes. The fact was, simply, that the
symmetrical disposition of the parts of a building about one or mote axes
was so unquestionably the master-discipline of academic architecture that
there was no need for him to discuss it, any more than he would need to
discuss the clothing of the building's forms in one or ancther of a number
of recognised ‘catalogued styles’ (as Lethaby was to call them). The details
of those styles could be had from a good crib-book, such as Normand’s
Paraillele, the axial discipline would be part of the air a student breathed,
and Guadet’s business as Professor was to handle the information that
could not be acquired from these two sources. It was not until the idea of
axial composition had ceased to be unquestionable, that any justification or
explanation of it appeared in print—Albert Ferran’s Philosophie de la
Composition Architecturale, published as late as i955, but cast entirely in
the frame of mind of the first decade of the century, when Ferran was
among Guadet’s last pupils, and largely iHustrated with Rome Prize pro-
jects of that epoch.

The resultant state is a curious one: here was the man who was the
master of Auguste Perret and ‘Tony Garnier, the twin progenitors of the
Medern Movement in France, whose book formed the mental climate in
which perhaps half the architects of the twentieth century grew up, and
provides valuable clues to the atmosphere in which the other, German,
half matured, and yet contained neither of the main themes—axial planning
and historical styling—of the mental discipline that produced it. The direct
influence of the book has, in fact, always been slight. Bulky, sumptuous,
expensive and largely unreadable, its place has been the shelves of reference
libraries, rather than in the students’ lodgings. But it has been much con-
sulted for information, if rarely read for instruction, Guadet himself saw
his position thus

I do not aspire to role of a guide for the whale journey; to those who leave

after me 1 indicate the luggage wanted on the voyage

and the bulk of its five thick volumes is taken up with luggage wanted on the
voyage, by a student at the Ecole—instruments and techniques of draughts-
manship, systems of proportion, walls and their openings; porticoes, bays

including a German translation, and made Durand's ideas one of the international
neo-Classical bases on which modern architectural theory was (often unwitting!y}
built.

and orders; reofs, vaults, ceilings and stairs: type plans and schedules of
accommodation for all conceivable sorts of public and semi-public
buildings, down to such matters as the provision of toilet facilities for infant
schools. In sum, five values of pre-digested wisdom on functional matters,
all second-hand, much of it out of date, all of it vital to success wherever ~
the Beaux-ris systera flourished—hence its continuing influence deep
into the century, and hence, too, the various attempts to write ‘a new
Guadet’, culminating in Talbot Hamlin’s Forms and Functions of Twentieth-
Century Architecture.

Nevertheless, between the lines of this mass of information, and in
annexed texts, such as the introduction, and the reprint of his inaugural
lecture of 1894, a certain amount of Guadet’s theory emerges, and some of
it deserves comment, cither for its intrinsic interest or for the echoes of it
that can be heard later in the century, For a start, his attitude to the past
is not altogether what one might expect from an academician, It is from
the masters and monuments of former periods that he prefers to draw his
examples, but he recognises the emergence of new building types and
functions in the lifetime of his own contemporaries, and concedes that

La, il faudra bien que je fasse des emprunts aux vivanta.

This may be only prudent, but one notes elsewhere 2 tendency to be
scornful of pure archaeology in the choice of style.

In Munich they imagine utilitarian Parthenons; im London, in response to the
entitely modem needs of clubs, you meet such old friends as the Palazzo
Farnese, the Procuratie ...-down ta the very mouldings for greater servility of
imitation.

Against this, he sets the example of the innovators of the generation of his
master, Labrouste.

Fortunately, certain proud artists—our masters—saw, and made ua see, that
freedom is mot simply the right to change one’s uniform, and our art has
gradually freed itself from such archaeology. Not everything was a success,
but all efforts in this direction bore fruit, and today we know and proclaim
that our art has a right to liberty, thar only liberty guarantees its life and
fecundity; in a word, its health, ,,,

If I insist on these considerations it is not, indeed, to wipe the slate clean of all
that went before; on the contrary our art, like our language, like our whole
civilisation, is—and must be—the rich inheritor of an estate that has accumu-
lated over the centuries. But I hate artistic proscriptions, like all prescriptions,
and artistic exclusiveness like all exclusiveness, and [ aim to make you under-
stand the sense, broad and severe, in which I understand that word ‘Classic’
that I set at the head of these studies.

Leaving aside the libertarian sentiment of the last sentence for the moment,
we see here an abstract and ambivalent attitude to histery—to be under-
stood, not imitated, its lessons embodied less in the actual monuments of
former time than in the principles that can be abstracted from them, This
last idea will be seen to be of peculiar importance in evaluating Guadet’s
understanding of ce mot de classtque.

This attitude to history was regarded by Guadet as ‘scientific’

The architect today is, or should be, a most manifold man: a man of science
in ell matters touching construction and its applications, a man of science also
in his profound knowledge of the whole heritage of architecture

and this clearly implies a different meaning of the word seience to that which
was current even among the generation of his own pupils. He means science
in the generalised sense in which Leonardo de Vinci understood science, as
erudition plus logical method {Paul Valéry’s Introduction d la Aféthode de
Leonardo da Vinci came out only five years before Guadet's book was
published, and it is probably no coincidence that Leonardo is Ferran's
most quoted authority) not as most twentieth-century writers understand
it, as a mental discipline based on experimental research, If anything,
Guadet was hostile to exact physical studics as a basis of design

He must be shown what can be built; later he wiil see by what means he can
secure its construction, that is, the realisation of s thing he muat already have
conceived

yet he certainly regarded his own teaching methods as scientific, and at one
point draws an energetic parallel between the ateliers of the Ecole and the
laboratories of a scientific institute.

The confusion that he introduced here was widespread in later years,
though the blame is not always to be laid upon his influence. Much of the
academic aesthetics of Blanc and his followers, which was scientific in the
older and more generalised sense, acquired the prestige accruing to science
in the newer and more specialised sense, in spite of the inconclusive result
of Charles Henry's atternpts in the Nineties to render them scientific in the
experimental sense as well.? The statement of Ozenfant and Jeanneret that

Part et la science dépendent du nombre*

suggests that they too, while claiming for their theories the prestige of the
advanced science of the twentieth-century, are still thinking of sctence in
terms of its condition before it became ‘the experimental philosophy’. This
confusion over the meaning af ‘scientific’ has been paralleled by an equal
confusion between the two possible meanings of ‘objective’, and the
aesthetics of Abstract art, largely derived from Charles Blanc, which are
capable of being rendered objective in the sense of logically impeccable,
have been regarded as also objective in the sense of substantiated by
experiment, which they have not been so far.

The connection with Abstract art needs to be made at this point,

"For the most recent assesament of Charles Henry, see Christopher Gray,
Cubist Aesthetic Theories (Baltimore, 1953}. Henry was the director of a Labora-
tory of the Psychatogy of Perception, annexed to the Feole des Beaux-Arts, and hia
ideas were still sufficiently in vogue in the Twenties to be reprinted at some length
in L'Esprit Nowveau, on which, see chapter 17,

* See chapter 15.

because Guadet has occasionally been represented as favouring an Abstract
architecture. Colin Rowe, for instance, has proposed that he ‘envisaged an
architecture of pure form’,’ but the illustrations in Eléments et Theories,
the work done zt the Ecole under his professorship, and the few buildings
to emerge from his office do not substantiate this idea, It would be truer to
say that he facilitated the emergence of an architecture of pure form in
much the same way that Blanc facilitated the emergence of Abstract art.
Blanc pays little attention to subject-matter, Guadet even less to stylistic
details, but this does not imply that either envisaged doing without them.
Guadet regards style as something outside the competence of his course,
open to the choice and temperament of the individual designer and the
examples in his book are drawn from all styles and periods; he is a sort of
negative eclectic, and—as was pointed out above—his attitude is liber-
tarian, he hated proscriptions and exclusivism,

The key point im his avoidance of the stylistic problem is the /arge et
sévére sense in which he understands the word elassigue. It is something like
the ‘unhistorical Classicism’ later proposed by Oud,* or the diagrammatic
Classicism of Labrouste and, even more, the masters like Ledoux and
Durand in whose work the roots of the Beaux-Arts tradition were struck.
It is like the sense of Greek intended by Alois Hirt, also in the early years
of the nineteenth century when he said

Whoever constructs correctly, builds even as the Greeks

—that is, rational and straightforward, 2 sense that comes back many
times in Le Corbusier's comparisons of machinery with Greek architec-
ture,?

Thus, on at least three topics current in the Twenties, the meaning of
history, the status of science, and the status of the Classical tradition, we
find Guadet anticipating widely held opinions, though it would be risky
to propose any influence or historical connection, On one topic, however,
and that of the greatest importance, an historical connection can certainly
be proposed: his conception of the actual process of designing buildings.
If his views on style were too negative to reach the printed page, his views
on symmetrical composition were too positive to do so, It was under his
professorship that the Beaux-Arts training became almost completely
focused on the elaboration of mutti-axially symmetrical plan patterns of
abstract, but unfunctional elegance. Elevational design became so secondary
that Ferran, for instance, feels no need to illustrate anything but the plana
and leaves the reader to infer the elevations from the columniation, etc.
shown on them; and where Ferran expresses a preference between one
plan and another—preferences which seem always to follow those of the

“Tn the Art Bulletin (New York, June 1953, p. 170).
* See chapter 22. ? See chapter 17,

Rome Prize jury—it is always for schemes that are symmetrical about more
axes.

But this hammering of axiality is not found in Eléments et Théories
indeed, Guadet mocks absohite axial symmetry as ‘du non-sens’; what he
does emphasise is the manner of fitting the parts of the building into the
axial plan

This course has for object the study of the composition of buildings in their
elements and their totality, from the double viewpoint of adapting them to
defined prograrmmes and to material necessities

and he expands this viewpoint on more than one occasion

Fo compose is to rnake use of what is known (ce qu'on sa?t), Composition has
materials, just as construction hag, and these materials are, precisely, the
Elements of Architecture.

and again

Nothing, to be sure, is more engaging than composition, nething more seduc-
tive. It is the true realm of the artist with no limits or frontiers but the impoé-
sible, What is it, to compose? It is to put together, weld, unite, the parts of a
whole. These parts, in their turn, are the Elements of Composition, and just
as you will realise your conceptiens with walls, openings, vaults, roofs—all
elements of architecture—you will establish your composition with rooms,
vestibules, exits and staircases. These are the Elements of Composition.

These elements are ce gu’on sait, the utilitarian information that makes up
the contents of the last three volumes of Eléments et Théories; cornposition
is the manner of putting them together, and the two concepts make up a
design philosophy that was common to Academics and Moderns ahke.
The approach is particulate; small structural and functional members
{elements of architecture) are assembled to make functional volumes, and
these (elements of composition) are assembled to make whole buildings.
To do this is to compose in the literal and derivational sense of the word,
to put together,

But it is not the only way of designing buildings, or the only way of
creating great architecture. To take an example that will be discussed in a
later chapter, Mies van der Rohe’s flata at Weissenhof were designed by
subdividing a buik volume to create functional spaces out of it. Although
there have been a number of later buildings conceived in this mode, by
Mies himself, by office-block designers like Skidmore, Owings and
Merrill, and by engineers like Buckminster Fuller, examples of this
approach were rare in the period covered by the present study, and it may
be taken as a general characteristic of the progressive architecture of the
early twentieth century that it was conceived in terms of a separate and
defined volume for each separate and defined function, and composed in
such a way that this separation and definition was made plain.

In view of the dependence of Guadet's theory of elementary composition

on neo-Classical writers like Durand, it should come as no surprise to find
that this clear separation of the parts of buildings has been identified as a
characteristic of neo-Classical architecture in general—by Kaufmann, who
also drew attention to its reappearance in twentieth-century architecture®
—and even of its earliest phase—by Wittkower, who drew attention to the
distinction of the parts in Lord Burlington’s designs.* ‘The theory seems
to have survived throughout the nineteenth century, the practice was some-
what submerged except where unstylistic aesthetic practices, such as those
of the Picturesque flourished, and the re-emergence of this piece-by-piece
mode of design may well have been due to the impact of the picturesque
‘English Free Architecture’ on an established neo-Classical tradition, as in
Germany, where it cannot be due to the impact of Guadet direct.

Thus, while it comes as little surprise to find Le Corbusier, a pupil of
Perret, persistently using elementary composition, and even paying direct
tribute to Guadet by captioning an alternative version of his League of
Nations design:14

Here . . . an alternative proposal, employing the same elements of composition.

the presence of Groepius among the architects of this persuasion must be
due, presumably and in part, to the impact of Muthesjus’s enthusiasm for
Engtish free planning on the Schinkelschuler tradition of neo-Classicism,
Yet it is worth noting that while twe of Gropius’s most famous and most
original designs, the Fagus factory of 1g11-13 and the Bauhaus at Dessau,
of 1925-6, both compose their elements in a free manner, the equally
famous Werkbund Pavilion at the Cologne exhibition of 1914 composes
its disparately conceived elements according to purely Beaux-Arts rules of
symmetrical composition, complete even with secondary and tertiary axes,
such as were discussed later, and quite independently in Ferran's book
However, mention of the Bauhaus raises the question of another theory
of elementary composition, which may have influenced Gropzus im its
design. This was propagated by the Elementarist Movement, and took
the form of supposing pictures, sculptures, etc, to be composed of certain
fundamental geometrical elements. This movement drew its inspiration
from Dutch and Russian Abstract art, and thus owes something to the
theories of Charles Blanc. It chimed in well with ideas that came from the
architectural side of academic thought and were current at the time, but its

* Kaufmann made this point in both Pan Ledoux bis Le Corbusier (Vienna,
£935) and in Architecture in the Age of Reason (London, 1955} but in neither case
does he give close documentation, though the latter work contains some suggestive
quotations from Gropius and others.

*See “Lord Burlington and William Kent’ (Archaeological Journal, London,
1945) where Professor Wittkower points out that in the elevation of Lord Bur-
lington’ a designs for ‘Tottenham Park, each part of the hause forms a distinct unit
OF 1S OWTL

™ Une Maison, Un Palais (Paris, 1928, p. 97).

H See chapter 14.

tendency was te focus attention on what Guadet would have called elements
of architecture, not of composition; that is, on structural components, and
it is in this sense that the word ‘element’ has passed into the common
vocabulary of the mainstream of development.

2: Choisy: rationalism and technique

IF GUADET’S MAIN thesis is almost lost beneath a flood of miscellaneous
information, Choisy’s, to which information is everywhere subservient, is
always in view, even if it continually opens side issues or casts light on other
matters. His book! is history, but it is history with a single theme—Form
as the logical consequence of Technique—that makes the art of architec-
ture always and everywhere the same
With every people, the art will undergo the same chotces, obey the same laws;
prehistoric art seems to contain all the others in embryo.
For Guadet, composition was the perennial theme, for Choisy it was con-
struction, The difference is one of background and work, not of generation,
for they were men of almost the same age, Guadet, born 1834 died in 1908,
Choisy, yust seven years younger, died in rgog. There was a difference of
temperament also; Guadet was, apparently, very much the Grand Professeur,
and in his later years almost as diffuse in personality as in his writings, but
Though short in stature, M. Choisy, was a man of very fine presence, with
something military about his personality?
and photographs taken of him at the time he received the RIBA Gold
Medal, 1904, show a rather hard-faced, business-like man in the sort of
equare-rigged jacket affected by sea captains and constructional engineers.
An engineer by training, he took a down-to-earth, practical-minded view
of architecture which remained for him, as for Henri Labrouste, L’ Art de
Bair. For him, the essence ef good architecture, was always construction,
the business of the good architect was always this: to make a correct
appraisal of the problem before him, after which the form of the building

1 This discussion of Choisy and his ideas is based on the Hustofre exclusively,
since this was the work of his that was most widely read and exercised the rnoat
general influence among the next two generations of architects. His other books,
such as the exhaustive Art de Batir series, each dealing with some major phase of
architectural history, such as the Roman or the Byzantine, were more specialised
and more bulky, and therefore hardly known to general architectural readers,
though their effective conclusiona are summarised in the relevant parts of the

isictre,

* Obituary in The Builder (London, 25 September 1909).

would follow logically from the technical means at his disposal

Style does not change according to the caprice of more or less arbitrary fashion,
its variations are nothing but those of processes... and the logic of methods
implies the chronolagy of styles.
in which, of course he was not alone, Semperian Rationalists having taken
asimilar view in Germany, and Gothicising Rationalists m England as well.
Thomas Graham Jackson, for instance, saw the matter in a less absolute
light, but in very similar terms.?

To clamour with some people for a mew style as if it could be had for the

asking, to parade your Art Nouveau . . . is to ignore the whole teaching of
history.
Not so did the great styles of the past come into being. , . . It was in the aug-

gestions of construction that the architect of the great artistic ages found his

truest Inspiratian.,

But, in terms of influence, Choisy had certain advantages over other
Rationalist theorists—historical, technical and literary advantages. The
historical advantage lay in his book appearing, in 1899, just as Art Nouveau
was about to go into its decline. T. G. Jackson’s objections came when it
was already past its peak, but those who read Choisy early would see his
view of the origins of style being proven before their eyes over the next
decade, Art Nouveau, widely regarded by then as a caprice de mode was
visibly proving deciduous, a distaste for the arbitrary among the younger
generation was hardening into an admiration for the logical, and Choisy’s
obituary on late Gothic must have sounded to them like a rappel d l’ordre
applicable to their own situation.

Complexity had reached its peak, a return to simple forms was the only way

to rejuvenate the art.

Choisy’s technical advantages lay in the appearance of his book and ita
illustrations. The Histoire de f Architecture is packed into two substantial,
but not bulky volumes; it is not too big to take home. The text is set out in
shortish paragraphs, each of which makes—normally—only one particular
point, so that reference is easily made, and on almost every page there is at
least one of his remarkable illustrations. Nothing could so weil reinforce
the idea of the continuity of architectural practice than the complete
homogeneity of style of these 1,700 illustrations, all drawn by his own hand
according to an almost invariable formula. The deviations from that for-
mula are not numerous—an occasional perspective, pure elevation or
plan—but, more important, they are not memorable. The formula is:
isometric in its setting out, it presents plan, section and elevation in a

* Thomas Graham Jackson, Reason in Architecture (London, 1906, pp. 156-7).
This book was the reprint of Graham’s lectures given at the Royal Academy Schools
in that year, a late outcropping of nineteenth-century Rationalist Gothicism and

part of the background to the ideas of Walter Richard Lethaby, discussed in
chapter 4.

single image, detailing is suppressed and one is left with en elegant and
immediately comprehensible diagram.

There is no attempt at artistic effect in them, they are the careful and learnedly
drawn representations of fact,

So convincing were they at the time that even the obituarist of The
Builder, who is elsewhere critical of Choisy’s methods, failed to observe
that they are pure abstractions, and don’t deal with such facts ay what the
building looks ike to an observer inside it or in front of it. Nevertheless, it
was almost certainly this quality of abstraction, of a logical construct rather
than the accidents of appearance, the elegant pattern of black and white on
the page, that endeared these illustrations to the generation born in the
Righteen-eighties, the generation which, outside architecture though never
out of touch with it, also perfected Abstract art. Le Corbusier, at least,
took these illustrations for his own, and used many of them in L'Esprit
Nouveau, through which agency they gained a fresh and wider circulation.
His literary advantage lies in the style of writing that goes with the short
paragraphs that have been discussed already. His overall argument is often
too diffuse to be read consecutively, but individual paragraphs, crisp and
aphoristic in manner, stick in the mind by virtue of their balanced con-
cision and eminent reasonableness, Thus, of Doric pediments he says

The pitch of the gable is that of the roof, which is governed by this double
condition, that the rain should nim off, and the tiles should not.
a tidy and reasonable explanation, even if it lacks any documentary or

factual evidence to support it, and rendered convincing by its very reason-
ableness. As the obituarist in The Builder observed

... ef he was too prone to treat as proved that which he had only succeeded
in representing as probable, many of his probabilities as to ancient construction
impress themselves on the reader, in his brilliant demonstrations, a3 at all events
more likely to be the true solution than any others that could be offered.

These pithy propositions, which so often appeared to his readers to have
tidied up some problem, explained some mystery in a definitive manner,
are without doubt, largely responsible for the durability of his reputation,
Memorable and quotable, they gave a clear and logical orientation to minds
secking guidance on detail points, as well as guiding principles, and in
some cases even furnished the phraseology and form of words for later dis-
cussions.

At times this too takes on a tinge of seeming-prophecy, and one wonders
if Le Corbusier’s willingness to be included among the founders of the
review L'Esprit Nouveau may not have been conditioned by a mental echo
of

We have perceived as a sign of the new spirtt (esprit nouveau) the search for

truth, the independence, of a rejuvenated art that breaks with conventional
types.

Choisy was, in fact, discussing the new spirit of emergent Gothic architec-
ture, but nothing could better describe the aims {if not the performance)
of L'Esprit Neuveau during the five and a half years of its existence than
this association of a search for truth with a rejuvenated art that broke with
conventional types of architecture.

Underlying the memorability of his writing—or perhaps partly caused
by it—was Choisy’s success in imposing his mental processes on his
readers. When they were stuck with some problem, they went back to his
favoured method of correct appraisal from which the answer logically
derives.

La question posée, Ia solution était indiquée.

They tended, more often than not, to phrase the question in his terms, and
thus—almost inevitably—were practically incapable of coming out with
any answers but his. He put in circulation a whole coinage of questions and
answers that remained current until devalued, much later, not by the
experience of his followers, but by a different kind of architectural history,
that of scholars like Worringer and Sedimayr, or—in France itself—
Focillon.

That devaluation did not even begin to affect the theoretical approach
of architects themselves until weil after the period covered by the present
study, and Choisy’s coinage, embodying major architectural values as weil
as the small change of discussion, needs to be examined in some detail,

Bearing in mind the basic concept of architectural form as the logical
consequence of technique, it should be noted that for Choisy technrgque,
méthode, procédé and ouiillage, are aspects of society as a whole, the com-
plete range of mechanisms and relationships that are put in motion in
the erection of a building.

Buildings classify themselves as witnesses fixing the way of life and the moral
condition of humanity, age by age.
This applies, equally, in his eyes to smaller units within the larger social
frame. On Gothic cathedral planning he notes that these civic churches had
to serve a dual purpose
... to serve both for meetings of the people and for sacred ritual. Hence their
mixed character as buildings at once municipal and religious. Sometimes the
civic influence prevaited, sometimes the ecclesiastical, and their alternations
explain and sum up the histery of successive types of plan
and even smaller units within the church had their traceable influence in
his eyes, for on conventual planning he observes
... from one group to another the character differs according to the very
spint of the Ruie.
‘According to the very spirit of the Rule’ is a very vague and generalised
sort of causation, but there are times when Choisy seems to envisage

nothing more definite than a kind of abstract necessity as a determining
factor.

L’arc-boutant (the flying buttresa) .. . ne fut point inventé, il s’imposa.
and he backs this up later with

It is in the nature of Gothic, a3 with all discoveries, that we can rarely manage
to mame the true inventor without dispute; the seeds incubate in obscurity, and
suddenly we witness various hatchings that imply only the logic of facta.

Such a position, of constructional fatalisrn, is probably mevitable in one
who adopts a strictly determinist view of architectural history, and it brings
out the difference between a Rationalist like Choisy, under the older
historiographic dispensation, and a merely reasonable man, under a different
historical discipline, who would tend to suppose that an inability to name
names derives from an absence of the necessary documentation. At all
events, it is an approach that depreciates personal effort, and tended to
leave his followers standing about waiting for a new structural principle
like the flying buttress, to impose itself. However, such an attitude was
understandably welcome in a period of revulsion against Art Nouveau
and its supposed excesses of personal wilfulness.

However, since Choisy was not specifically arguing against Art Nouveau,
but speaking in more general terms, the drift of his remarks sometimes
appears to favour some aspects of Art Nouveau practice. Thus the concept
of the all-round designer receives implied support when he speaks admir-
ingly of Renaissance architects who

.. + possessed an universality of talent, all matters touching form were their
domain , .. the superiority of the Renaissance lies in not having arts indepen-
dent of one another, but a single art in which all expressions of the beautiful
were fused

Ideas like these helped to prepare French architects, who did not have the
backing of Germany’s kind of Arta and Crafts Movement, for post-War
forays into the neighbouring arts of painting and product design, circulated
the concept of a single overriding art of design embracing all others, and
began to give currency to the word form as part of the terminology of
design theory—a word closely associated with later developments in the
field of industrial design.

In that context, form is generally regarded as having laws of its own:
laws of harmony, proportion and so forth. But on these laws Choisy is
ambiguous. He notes the use of systematic proportion, for instance, wher-
ever he finds evidence of it, but rarely accords it great importance

The Egyptians did not accept that the effect of a monument resides entirely
in the abstract harmony of its lines

and although he records the use of tracés regufateurs in the Middle Ages
and Renaissance, to advance him as a justification for their use, as Le

Corbusier seems to wish to do on occasion, is to misrepresent him. in fact,
his best-known remarks on geometrical traces appear in a gloss on Serlio
that seems to be intended only as an ironic comment on regulating Hines
ag an intellectual exercise

We take from Serlio . . . the proportional setting out of a door in a panel of

width m’,#”’.. . (construction C).

In reality, canstruction C, results in giving the door a width equal to one third

of m'n’ and a heitht equal to twice the width, but the praphical method that
leads to this result is Interestme in itself and contains a whole methad,

but one does not feel that Choisy really considers this method worth the
trouble, if the same result could have been attained by simple measure-
ment.

However, as a Rationalist, he naturally inclined toward the orderly and
the logical, and some sort of system in dimensioning and proportion
receives his implied approval from his use of faintly derogatory language

ce vague sentiment de ’harmonie qu’on nomme le goiit

to describe the alternative; personal taste. In any case it seems Etkely that
what interests him is net the pure harmony of preportions, but the use of
dimensional modules implying a sense of scale, deriving from the multipli-
cation of a standard structural component,

Modular proportions: we have observed that they result, as an inevitable con-

sequence, from the use of brick,

Classical arr had only an abstract harmony based on proportion alone; but, as

Lessus observed, it ia to the Middle Ages that the art of emphasising the
dimensions belongs, and the principle of scales.

This principle of scale seems to subsist, in Choisy’s view of the Middle
Ages, in two things. Firstly, dimensioning by the size of a man, rather than
increasing door-heights, etc. as the building became larger

Man does not change dimensions according to the importance of the monument,

and secondly, as a consequence of Romanesque and Gothic stone-laying
methods, course by course, which, he claims, led to the necessity of making
all vertical dimensions into multiples of the course-heights, so that
capitals and friezes, door-jambs and column shafts, all answered to the
same moduie, Arguable as this last observation may be, the importance of
the idea of building to a human scale, advanced in this influential context,
is not to be overlooked.

The Gothic masons who practised this technique were the heroes of his
secand volume, the heroes of the first had been the builders of the Doric
temples. In the words of de Dartien's Compte Rendu

Greek art and Gothic... these were the subjects to which we may say M.
Choisy has dedicated himself for preference. It is always Greek architecture
and Gothic architecture that stand cut, the one for nearly half the first volume,
the other for half the second,

and he continues to justify Choisy in this distribution of emphasis.

And it is just that ir be so, for these nwo architectures, so absolutely different
in spirit, stand in the front rank of all the styles by the high value of the qualities
they hold in common—ctarity of methods, sincerity of expression, spontaneity,
delicacy and intensity of artistic feeling.+
Choisy’s views on these two preferred styles are of the greatest interest,
and were of great seminal power, but before passing on to them there is
an oddity of his History (an oddity that he shared with other Rationalists}
that affects his view of the place ef Doric in Greek technical culture, and is
best dealt with first.

This oddity, which was a certain fascination with the use of the forms
and methods of one material in connection with another, has an interest of
its own, in any case, as will be acen later. Such a procedure ought, presum-
ably, to be anathema to a Rationalist, but Choisy seems to have no over-
riding objections to it. Inevitably, almost, he compares Doric to wooden
structure, as generations of neo-Classicists had done, but in a way that seems
to invert the normal implications of this comparison. Doric for him owes
nothing to carpentry, which he believes to be a borrowing from ship-
building technique, and

. .. the difference from our system of carpentry is radical; Greek woodwork

., is a piling up pure and simple, a veritable masonry of wood.

The Doric order was to be the application of this mode of building to stone.
so that, if anything, pre-Deric was 2 wooden architecture imitating the,
as yet, undiscovered modes of stone construction, However, Choisy finds
the Classic type of reversal in Indian architecture.

The stone is put to work in the manner of wood, with all the jointing techniques

that suit wood . . . a carpentry of stone,

This was for the past, of course, but for the materials of his own time,
notably iron, Choisy believed that appropriate forms and methods had
already been evolved,

At the Halles de Parts we can see realised a whole body of forms that arise
naturally from the material ernployed.
But not all Rationalists were quite so sure as this, and ‘Thomas Graham
Jackson in his Royal Academy lectures of 1906, after dernanding that iron
should nat be used after the manner of brick and stone, nevertheless
continues

It has often strack me that the half-timber work of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries contains many suggestions for this new way of construction. In the

*This Compte Rerdu adopts throughout an extremely evlogistic tone, and
appeared immediately upon the publication of the Aisteire. It bas the air of being
either a piece of ‘inspired’ puffing (which a work by Choisy could hardly have
needed by that date) or of interested Mattery. It may yet, however, be read with
profit a9 an ‘official’ Rationalist evaluation of the master's work.

first place it ia a trabeated style in the literal sense of the word, a style of posts

and beams. ... And iron construction is very jike carpentry. It too is a system

of trabeation, of posts and beams, ties and braces; it has the tensile strength

and rigidity of timber to a superior degree, and hangs together by its joints,

cleats and bolts, much as carpentry by its tenons and mortices,*
This transposition of forms and methods must appear a muddle to later
readers, but the greatest muddle—a very productive and influential
muddle—was Auguste Perret’s transposition of wood-framing techniques
on to reinforced construction,* a procedure which he, apparently, held to
be warranted by Choisy. Right or wrong, however, this act of trans-
position served an important purpose in bringing a new material within the
accepted body of forma procedures in building design, and by endowing
it with a rectangular aesthetic of posts and lintels, made it accessible to
integration with the rectangular aesthetics of Abstract art that appeared
after 1918, and thus, in a very real sense, determined the appearance of
the new architecture.

But Perret’s structural methods owe a further debt than this to Choisy,
and to his views on Gothic structure in particular. Gothic, as has been said
above, was one of Choisy’s two preferred styles, because it constitutes in
his eyes, the culmination of logical method in structure.

Comes the Gothic period . .. the mew structure is the triumph of logic in art;

the building becomes an organised being whose every part constitutes a living

member, its form governed not by traditional modeis, but by its function,
and only ita function,
This is Choisy’s view of Gothic, but, as so often happens with him, it
sounds in retrospect like a directive to his successors. Logic, analysis,
function, economy, performance—

Everywhere, in the detailing of the forms, we have recognised the spirit of
analysis that governs the economy of the whole work... in effect, a construc-
tion where stone works to the limit of ita resistance,
and the consequence of this was, as im later Modern-Movement theory,
that the appearance of the building was supposed to some extent to he
fixed thereby

Hy the very fact that the stone works to its maximum effort, the absolute size

isin no way arbitrary; and the eye, most sure of mathematical instruments, at

once establishes the scale, which calculations may figure out in due course,
This paragraph brings forward a number of important ideas that were to
enjoy further currency. The idea of an unavoidable mathematical relation-
ship of the parts of a building, on an absolute, not a relative scale, which
clearly ties in with the idea of modular dimensioning discussed above,
and the idea of the eye as an accurate judge of measurement, an idea that
played a vital part in the so-called objective aesthetics of post-War Abstract
art.

* Reason tn Architecture, p. 167. * See chapter 3.

anh ot

Choisy’s whole view of Gothic structure is clearly coloured by his carly
readings in Willis and Viollet-le-Duc, and it was a view of Gothic that one
of his own supposed followers, Pol Abraham, was to call seriously in ques-
tion by demonstrating the considerable redundancies and large margins of
safety of all those Gothic structures that have managed to survive.?
Abraham also did much to discredit Viollet-le-Duc’s theory that Gethic
vaulting was a light panelled structure carried on a framework of ribs, an
idea that was also used by Choisy, and extended by him to wall-structures
of the period as well.

The Gothic vault ia nothing but a ridged vault where the panels are independent
and supported by the rib-work ... and the wall is nothing but an infill.

Frame and fill, the posts that bear the load, and the screen panels that do
not—these concepts seem ta have been current wherever the Willis/ie-
Due view of Gothic had encountered nineteenth-century jren construction
—for what was dubiously true of the Sainte Chapelle, was abundantly so
for the Galérie des Machines, where the arches were grounded on rollers,
and the glass infill of the roof was carried by a system of riblets that span
the spaces between the main trusses—a contemporary reworking in iron
and glass of Viollet-le-Duc’s vision of Gothic as a form of elastic, self-
compensating structure, But most important from our point of view ts the
fact that Auguste Perret took over from Choisy the idea of a load-bearing
frame with lightweight infilling, and from there forward, the concept of
the separation of support and cladding became one of the most discussed,
if least practised ideas of the Modern Movement.

The mood of Gothic, as Choisy saw it, was progressive, forward looking
and enabled its practitioners to tackle

... the most daunting problems with the zest of that spirit of progress and reform
that animated society as a whole.

and again the use of the historic present (aime) must have struck his
younger readers as a call to themselves. It would also be a call to model
themselves on the Greeks for

Ancient Greece and our Middle Ages meet in this faith in progress.

The Greece he has in mind is the Greece of the Periclean Empire, Doric
not Hellenistic, and in writing of Doric architecture he is at his very best
— better even than on Gothic, on which he has, in fact, one slight reserva-
tion: the buttresses cannot be seen from within the main vessel of the

' Pol Abraham, Viollet-le-Duc et le Rationalisime Médidvale (Paris, 1933). Though
there can be little doubt that this ‘demolition’ of Viollet-le-Duc is overdone, an
has been too enthusiastically quoted out of context, and that mediseval builders
may indeed have believed that the ribs carried the panels and so forth, Abraham's
demonstration of structural redundancies is entirely convincing, and makes it very
clear that in surviving Gothic buildings the stone very rarely works to ita limit.

building and this causes him inquéetude
... at firet sight one docs not understand its stability

but he has no such qualms about Doric. But in his discussion of this other
preferred style of his, he brings into juxtaposition two ideas very rarely
found together in works of theory—pure form and picturesque composi-
tion—though of course they had existed together in neo-Classical practice,
in Nash and Schinkel particularly, The way in which he arrives at this
position is as interesting as the juxtaposition was to be productive,

Deric, for him, is a reformist style, a revolution against the applied
decoration of previous ages

... the Mycenaean age only thought of decoration a3 an applied and outward
show

but this was not good enough for Choisy’s Greeks

They would need a more masculine accent,’ a firmer expression; they placed
their ideal in an architecture that scorned the easy seductions of ornament,
an architecture that aimed, above all, at a severe beauty of line... new types,
more abstract and more simple
and it was the revival of these qualities that Choisy found admirable in
Renaissance architecture.

What architecture had just regained was the sense of classic beauty in its

highest and most abstract purity,
But this style, praiseworthy for its abstract purity of undecorated form
(triglyph and metope were not decoratian to him) is set firmly by Choisy
in the context of picturesque grouping. And picturesque is to be understood
in its strict sense, not the eroded picture-postcard sense. It is to be under-
stood from a succession of pictures (tableaux) seen by the visitor approach-
ing the Parthenon, and as a deliberate, not an accidental, mode of proce-
dure, He compares the plans of the Acropolis before and after the fire had
razed most of its buildings and comments that though the earlier plan was
the result of an accumulation of accidents

. the other is methodically conceived according to an overall view and
adapted to a site that had been cleared by the fire, and in this new Acropolis
the apparent asymmetries are only a means of giving a picturesque aspect to
the most cunningly balanced group of architecture there ever was.

This is putting a very high value on picturesque composition, and makes a
striking contrast to Beaux-Arts practice with its routines of major and

4’ The idea of a male or masculine architecture was transmitted primarily through
academic channels. Thus, Charles Blanc had written in his Grammatre, ‘In the Doric
order the proportions are male . . . the architecture of the Dorians was to be solid,
massive, powerful, and it was to demonstrate its strength as an athlete flexes his
muscles’"—a grotesque, though reassuringly down-to-earth, foreshadowing of
Geoffrey Scott’s somewhat otherworldly theory of humanist values in architecture,
discussed in chapter 4.

minor axes. He identifies the components of the picturesque method with
complete accuracy: the respect for site.

The Greeks never visualised a building without the site that framed it and the

other buildings that surrounded it .. . siting it ag nature would have done
profiting by given factors

Architecture bent itself to these subjections, and tumed them to account
balancing of masses

Each architectural motif, on its own, is symmetrical, but every group ia treated
like a landscape where the masses alone balance out

aa seen by the eye of a walking viewer at ground level

The method of balancing will emerge from a study of the successive pictures

that the Acropolis of the fifth century presented to the visitor.
And not only is the picturesque good enough for the Greeks, it is also
nature's way.

So proceeds Nature... symmetry reigns in each part, but the whole is subject

only to those laws of equilibrium for which the word ‘balance’ is at once the

physical expression and the mental image.
To Choisy as a practical man, this ad foc and natural mode of composition
would obviously appeal, but nevertheless the association of Greek Doric,
an ultimate term in architectural discipline and regularity, with asym-
metrical composition remains a remarkable achievement in the context of
French late nineteenth-century design. The message did nat go by default,
and though the asymmetries of post-War building were to have a more
complicated aesthetic basis than this, Choisy's illustrations turn up, and
his arguments too, in support of Le Corbusier's anti-axial views on plan-
oing, All the same it may be doubted if Choisy realised that he was putting
a mine under accepted planning methods for a younger generation to
explode. His last words on Greece are conventional.

Greek art... seems to be a disinterested cult offered to the idea of harmony end

abstract beauty.
Choisy, indeed, has his soft passages, when he falls short of his best form.
His logical and teleological view of architectural development makes little
allowance for such randem factors as the exercise of the human will, with
the result that his attitude to the Renaissance 1s muddled and self-contra-
dictory, largely because he failed to take inte account the full range of
social determinants. Similarly his study of the nineteenth century is un-
satisfactory because he failed to take inte account the full range of tech-
nical determinants. He seems not to have observed that, at the time that the
book was writing, both equipment and materials were in revolution, and
that—by his own standards even--architecture ought to be in revolution
as well, But he stops with Labrouste’s Bibltathéque Nationale observing that

it was a début that contained plus que des promesses, and remains silent about
the last third of the century. In the meantime outillage was being revolu-
tionised by electricity and the internal combustion engine, construction by
steel and reinforced concrete. Yet he could say of Gothic building tackle

We recognise there our present engines, near enough, the crane, the capetan,

all our machinery, which itself is nothing but the machinery of antiquity.
However great his contributions to the mental equipment of the Modern
Movement, his failure to appreciate the emergence of its mechanical
equipment meant that he could contribute nothing final to it, But some-
thing like final contributions were to come from his own direct successors,
Auguste Perret and Tony Garnier.

3: The academic succession: Garnier and Perret

OUTSIDE THE contribution of engineers like Freyssinet, France gave to the
developing practice of a new architecture before 1914, only the work of two
members of the academic succession to Guadet: both Auguste Perret
(1874-1954) and Tony Garnier (1869-1948) had been his pupils and
imbibed both the progressive and the negative aspects of his teaching, Both
also owe something to Choisy, but the debt is slighter in the case of
Garnier, whose career was academically respectable, much preater in the
case of Perret, who did not stay the course.

But whatever the debt to Choisy, the prime one in their mode of destgn-
ing buildings—compasing, that is—is to Guadet, whose course they heard,
whose influence they underwent in the Nineties, when he was in his prime
as a professor, Garnier bore off the Rome Prize in 189g (two years after
Perret had left} with a design that is still cited (by Ferran)! as a model of
composition and, indeed, represents the Beaux-Arts ideal at its most
abstract and most elegant. It is a design for the central office of a State
Banking House, with its main work-spaces distributed peripherally around
an enormous covered court in the centre of which, but occupying barely
a tenth of its area, is the main banking room, The scale is grandiose, the
space given to monumental circulation, entrance facilities, etc. is utterly
disproportionate—yet this scheme was preferred by the Prize jury to others
with far more efficient circulations, far greater functional sense, One can
understand how a generation rendered suspicious of the arbitrary by
Choisy’s teaching would be in revolt against such design principles as these,
and against the juries that enforced them,

But to suppose that Garnier made his design with his tongue in his cheek,
a3 was apparently supposed by students in Paris after 1918,* jealous of his
reputation as a father of Modern architecture, seems not to be borne out
by the evidence. Had he done so, it is unlikely that so astute an academic
critic as Ferran would be taken m by his design fifty years later, and the

1In his Philosophie, mentioned in chapter 1,

* André Lurgat told the author that it was a great source of embarrassment te
young progressive architects of the early Twenties, to have to explain away such a

ign.

evidence rather points to the probability that he tured to his Cité Indus-
trielle project in revulsion against ideas he had previously held with some
Bincerity.

To occupy one’s time with such a scheme while a penstonnaire at the
Villa Medici was an unprecedented and, indeed, revelutionary course of
action, but there is evidence that he also occupied some part of his time with
more conventional academic exercises.? However, he seems to have been
in an unacademic and troubled frame of mind while he was there, for one
of his few recorded statements on architecture,‘ written in 1960, reada

Since all architecture rests on false principles, the architecture of antiquity was

aN eITor. TRUTH ALONE IS BEAUTIFUL. In architecture truth ia product of the

calculations made to aatisfy known needs with known means.
There is an echo here of Guadet’s ‘Composer, c'est farre Vemploi de ce gu’on
sait’, but the use of caleuls sounds more like Choisy, whose book was new in
men’s minds, though the sentiment goes far beyond anything in it. But
this seems to signal fairly accurately the frame of mind in which an
architect might turn from the unreality of a Rome Prize programme, to the
verité of an industrial town.

That verité, however, was by no means utterly removed from Beaux-Arts
connotations. Unlike Sant’Elia’s Cittd Nuova fragments of 1913-14,'
Garnier’s project is not concerned with the problems of any actual town or
city." La Cité Industrielle stands upon an imaginary site—an ideal site, in
fact, for a more-than-convenient flat-topped ridge lifts the residential area
clear above the industrial zone, The zones, too, though they are of the sort
generally envisaged by early twentieth-century town-planning thought, are
treated almost as Guadetesque elements, Residence, industry, transporta-
tion, sport and health are allotted separate and compact areas of land, all
industry in one unit, all residential in another, with—as between industry
and residence—quite inadequate communications, the single axial road
that rung the length of the residential ridge bottle-necking all traffic to and
from the industrial zone into a single artery without relief roads.

But the academic survivals go deeper than this. The residential zone,
though irregular in outline, has its streets laid out on a regular rectangular
grid with axe d’équilibre and axe secondaire, with its salles d’assembides at its
intersection, in the centre. The houses, though freely sited—more or less
—are squared up to the road grid. The pattern, indeed, is like Camillo

4In rg12 Tony Gamier published plans of a reconstruction of Tusculum.,

* Quoted in the intraduction to L'Chuere de Tony Garnier (Paris, 1938} edited
by Badovici and Morancé,

' See chapter 10.

* Though most of the work on the Cité Industrielle was supposedly sufficiently
finished for exhibition in 1904, it should be noted that it waa not definitely published
(as a large and complex portfolio) until 1918, by which time it was possible for
Garnier to incorporate into it some of the buildings he had actually constructed at
Lyons, as mentioned helow,

Sitte with the serpentinings taken out. In amaller detail the house plans—-
though asymmetrical, in some cases—seem derived from those precepts
upon /a salle et ses dépendances that Guadet derived from Blondel, while
individual public and institutional places seem drawn directly from
Guadet’s ideas, notably the salle des collections of his art school. In eleva-
tional treatment the various buildings tend to follow Guadetesque pre-
cedent when they are largely fenestrated and, indeed, establish already a
number of norms to which Garnier returned in his later work, But it should
be emphasised that it is not the Gsuadet of the Cours de Théorie, nor the
Guadet of the Hétel des Posies that he follows here, but the Guadet revealed
in his son’s small house in the Boulevard Murat, which will be discussed
later, The small houses of the Cité Industrielle, however, are even simpler
than this, solidly-walled with plain rendered surfaces, flat roofs and no
cornices. It is in these smaller buildings that Garnier is most truly a fore-
runner of later developments in architecture, and Morancé and Badovici,
when they published their book on Garnier in 1931, drew special attention
by means of footnotes to the table of plates, to such features as foif-ferrasse
jardin, and suppression totale de la corniche.

Tt was in this that he was a forerunner of detail developments in archi-
tectural form, but as a forerunner of developments in architectural thought
he must be remembered and valued simply for having considered an indus-
trial town (indeed, any town) as a subject worthy of the architect's drawing
board, By this gesture he extended architecture's terms of reference, and
he brought the art closer to the reality—/e verité—of an industrialised
epoch. However, the impact of this gesture was somewhat softened, as far
as his own contemporaries were concerned, by the fact that—though sub-
stantially completed by 190q—it had to wait until the end of the War for
publication, and it was upon the men of 2 generation younger that it made
its greatest effect, This was a generation that had been prepared for ideas
about industrial cities by the Futurists, and had, by then, some completed
works by Garnier to look at.

Although Garnier’s unconventional attitude to architecture would not
recommend him to the regularly constituted elements of the French
administrative hierarchy that handed out big commissions, it did bring him
the attention of one of France’s most enlightened politicians of the time,
Edouard Herriot, then Mayor of Lyons, Garnier’s native town. Les Grands
Traveux de la Ville de Lyon, put in hand under Herriot’s leadership,
occupied Garnier for fourteen years, from 1g06 te 1g20. The work is
partly a realisation and extension of ideas that already existed in the Cité
Industrielle, such as the stadium, and the great hospital centre at Grange
Blanche; and partly a making good of the most conspicuous deficiency of
the Crzé.

In spite of the name, this project had been weak on the industrial side.
Out of one hundred and sixty-five pages and several large sheets of plans

in the 1918 edition of La Cité Industrielle, only five pages are given to
industry alone. And of these, two are borrowings from his actual work on
industrial construction at Lyons. For a large part of his work for Herriot
was in laying out marketmg and abbatoir facilities on the very largest
scale. This work included a large hall with its roof carried on lattice trusses
in the manner of Contamin’s Galerie des Machines, and a remarkable group
of auxiliary buildings housing power-plants, cold-storage, etc. in which he
combines his Classicist learnings (cornices and a form of Doric column-
fluting on the chimneys) with the satisfaction of industrial requirements to
produce an architecture which can stand comparison on the one hand with
early nineteenth-century industrial buildings, and with the projects of con-
temporaries like Behrens, Poelzig or Sant’Elia on the other.

A similar interaction between Classicist leanings and technical necessities
underlies the work of Auguste Perret, but similarities between him and
Garnier go little further than this. As has been said above, he left the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts in 1895 before completing his course, but after show-
ing considerable aptitude for his studies, in order to join his father’s con-
tracting business. He had been designing independently from about 1890,
the year he entered the Ecole, so that he had possessed, almost from the start,
that combination of the architect and the practical man of affairs that makes
him comparable with Peter Behrens in status, as well as influence on the
rising generation—for it seems clear that these two transitional Classicists
were among the most influential figures in the formation of the generation
that produced, rather than pioneered, Modern architecture.

With Perret, that influence depends chiefly on three complete buildings
and the frame of another, all but one of them completed before 1914, and
on a brief period as teacher and elder statesman in the Nineteen-twenties.
An examination of these buildings will show that his achievement was to
have imsposed on reinforced concrete structure an eclectic aesthetic—
derived from Guadet as much as Choisy—that his contemporaries, and the
following generation too, believed to be the natural form of reinforced-
concrete construction, In fact, he left concrete structure no more advanced
than he found it and some, more recent, criticism has even suggested that
he retarded its development. On the other hand he left concrete an aestheti-
cally acceptable material (in the eyes of the younger generation at least)
which is what it certainly was not before him, in spite of the efforts of
Hennebique. And this acceptability was achieved by finding concrete a
place within the possibilities of time-honoured structural and architectural
concepts, not by extending those concepts to include the possibilities of
concrete construction.

The three pre-1grq buildings depend, as Perret himself admitted, on a
Choisyesque transposition of reinforced concrete inte the forms and
usages of wooden construction—a rectangular trabeated grid of posts and
beams. This procedure which makes little use of the monolithic qualities,

and less of the plastic ones, of the material, the aasertions of Perret's fol-
lowers notwithstanding, appears to have a complicated derivation, Perret
himself is reported as claiming its descent from the half-timbering of
northern France (much as Thomas Graham Jackson wished to have tron
construction based upon English half-timbering) but there is more to the
matter than this. The house in the Boulevard Murat, executed by Perret
for Paul Guadet in 1912, has a short-span grid of beams and posts clearly
exposed on its street-front, the voids being filled in with glazing, and stone
spandrels—the uppermost run of spandrels, directly under the projecting
cornice, being treated somewhat as a Doric frieze—the whole design has
the quality of a rationalised, geometricised pilastered elevation, somewhat
on the model of a Chicago school office building, but perfectly conceivable
as a direct derivation from the elder Guadet’s approach to ‘les elements de
l'architecture’. If, on the other hand, Perret derived this type of structure
from woodwork practice independently of Guadet, he had here again good
visible precedent in Paris, The piecemeal replacement of timber beams by
concrete ones can be seen at a vernacular level in the long factory sheds of
the Rue des Cordeliers area. Bay-widths and beam depths are often iden-
tical for wood and concrete, even in the case of complete concrete struc-
tures, some of which even retain the corner brackets used in wooden work,
and theoretically unnecessary in concrete. The dates of these structures are
difficult to determine, but details of door-furniture, etc, suggest that some
of the complete concrete sheds, even, may go back to the Eighteen-

Certainly, Perret's early use of concrete is no more adventurous than is
to be found in the Rue des Cordeliers, and in his first important concrete
manifesto-building, 254: Rue Franklin, only one beam—the fascia at first
floor level—spans a distance that would be quite inconceivable in wood.
Nevertheless, this is a most origtnal building, if only for the way it avoids
the inhuman results of the light-well requirements of the Paris town-
planning code, The solution devised by Perret—that of putting the requi-
Bite courtyard area on the front of the building, instead of behind it—has
already in 1903, the Gordian quality of some of Le Corbusier’s ways of
avoiding difficulties, and results in a floor-plan arranged in a hollow U
facing the street—something completely unprecedented in Paris at the
time. But this has nothing to do with reinforced concrete; even the canti-
levers that bring the arms of the U forward over the street are of such a
form that they could probably have been achieved in wood or corbelled
brickwork.

What is equally important is the way in which Perret uses his facade to
express both his material and his Choisyesque attitude to structure. The
main supporting members, both horizontally and vertically, are exhibited
on the face of the wall, but without putting any concrete on show, since
the beams are tile-faced. At the top of the building the areas between the

frame members are unfilled, thus creating open loggie, but on any typical
floor, these spaces are filled with fenestration, or with pot-tiles faced with
brownish ceramic mosaic, making a raised pattern of giant daisies—a
pattern which effectively emphasises the unstructural nature of these panels
of fill, But there is no attempt to separate the load-bearing and sheltering
functions of the wall, the fill is effectively co-planar with the face of the
structural grid, and, internally, though the plan is free (but no freer than
some of the fragments of Blondel’s planning to which Guadet referred)
wall surfaces tend to run simply from one structural upright to the next,
and there are no free-standing columns.

The importance of this building lies, indeed, more in the originality of its
plan, the use of concrete, and its bold display of framing as an exterioz effect,
than in its structural aspects. His next important pre-War building, the
Garage Ponthieu of 1905, marks a recession from this advanced position to-
wards one which is more nearly Guadetesque though the structural concrete
is now exposed. This building has been discussed as if it were a simple,
unassuming structure whose forms were the simple outcome of purpose and
materials ‘barren of all refinements . . . exhibiting all the clumsiness of a
new architecture in the making’ and ‘the reinforced-concrete skeleton is
given full opportunity te determine the character of the fagade’.? The
latter statement is questionable, the former false.

Rebuttal comes from Perret himself, claiming the Garage Ponthieu
to be the premifre tentative (au monde) de béton armeé esthétique,® and it seems
clear that the aesthetic he had in mind was that of the Beaux-Arts. The
facade is composed as a rhythmic travée of pseudo-pilasters disposed 3: 5 : 3,
the rhythm being counted off by the windows that occupy what would
(in a Chicago school building) be termed an ‘attic frieze’, and the vertical
composition is closed by a projecting cornice. The elements of the fagade
are, indeed, those of the later house in the Boulevard Murat, and though
they lack the particular decorative devices used by Paul Guadet, the
square edged modenature employed throughout is far from unrefined, while
the great rose-window over the doors and the stained glass of the doors
themselves, not to mention the bronze window-surrounds at ground floor
level seem to suggest aesthetic pretension rather strongly.

As to the general form of this fagade, and its relationship to the material
employed, it is to be observed that only one span on the facade is as long
as the beams inside, and that is the one that crosses the top of the rose-
window, the equivalent beam beneath it being supported, visually, at
its outer quarter-spans by two colonettes, as it were im antis. The effect of
these columns is to muddle, not reinforce the expression of the garage’s

? An opinion expressed by Peter Collins in ‘The Doctrine of Auguste Perret’,
Architectural Review (London, August 1953) and an opinion expressed by Sigfned
Giedion in Space, Tine and Architecture (London, 3rd edition, 1954 p. 329).

* The opinion of Auguste Perret, cited (remarkably enough) on the same page
by Sigfried Giedion,

interior economy on the outside, the central gangway between the parking
bays being the same width as the major central span, not of the door
opening. It cannot truthfully be said that this exterior elevation has been
determined either by the material employed, or the function of the build-
ing, but rather, one senses a compromise between the positions of Choisy
and Guadet, that is between the expression of the technique of the period
(including automobiles and reinforced concrete) and the Beaux-Arts con-
cept of ‘design first, structure afterwards’.

In his next major design task of the pre-War period, Perret found him-
self driven explicitly into the latter position, serving tnitially on the design
staff of the Thédtre des Champs Elysées as structural consultant to Henry
van de Velde. This was an unhappy collaboration that ended in quarrels,
public polemics and considerable bad blood,’ but whoever, in fact designed
the exterior and detailed the interior, the main structure 1s undoubtedly
Perret’s own, and stands as a witness to his mode of thought at the time
of its design {1912} and is one of his most prized works in the eyes of his
followers. Since this structure was entirely hidden, there was no need for
him—as in the Garage Ponthieu—to put an aesthetic face on it while con-
cealing his more daring employment of the material for the interior, the
whole frame is consistent in feeling, and incorporates curved and bracketed
members that could net be accommodated in his trabeated exteriors.

It is imbued throughout with the feeling of a wooden framing built
of standard timber sections; thus, none of the vertical members is dimin-
ished toward the top but becomes increasingly redundant in section and
farther away from the Choisyesque ideal of materials working to their
limits. Bracketed corners under constant-section beams are used instead of
arches to take up heavy distributed loads, and although there are undoubted
good reasons concerned with simplification of shuttering for these practices,
the general appearance of the frame is of a complicated piece of joiner’s
work, with beams threaded through upright stiles, and glued fillets in
some of the corners. ‘The monolithic qualities of the frame are used only to
attain those torsional resistances that derive, in joinery, from dove-tailed
or mortised joints. However, viewed out of context—the only way it can be
viewed as a visual image—this frame is an exciting artefact in its own right,
and one that differently clad might have looked very like the framed archi-
tecture of the Twenties, There can be ne doubt that it must have appeared
to be very close to their own hearts’ desires to the succeeding generation—
the generation that flocked to admire his church at le Raincy.

Notre Dame du Raincy is a confusing monument, but of considerable
importance, Almost all its visible surfaces were concrete faced—the facing

*' The authority on these graceless bickerings is Paul Jamot in Angusfe Perret
et 1’ Architecture du Béton Armé, Sach squabbles, which are basically disputes over
Priority and self-esteem, have been unusuaily frequent in the present century, but
the trend is not necessarily to be blamed on the interest shown by art historians in
the architecture of their contemporaries.

being no less than the carefully shuttered surface of the structure—and its
completion in 1922 confirmed Perret’s standing as the master of reinforced
concrete in the eyes of a generation that was convinced that new materials
would revolutionise architecture. But their acceptance of the church
aesthetically must have been considerably eased by the fact that there was
httie new here structurally. In its widths of span it lags well behind what
had already been achieved by Freyssinet, though the very tall slim columns
— almost thirty-five feet high but barely fourteen inches thick—represent a
bold stroke for the pericd.

However, the general form of the construction is weil covered by
Choisyesque precedents that had had, by then, more than two decades of
acceptance. At first sight the form is Gothic, even though it lacks the
pointed arches of Anatole de Baudot’s earlier concrete church," for it has
a nave slightly higher than its aisles, from which it is separated by a row of
tall ‘aspiring’ columns and its vast windows are filled by a tracery—that is
literally a remplissage—of precast geometrical units. But this Sainte
Chapelle du béton arimé™ avoids Choisy's difficulties with Gothic’s extemal
buttressing that was invisible from within by adopting a general procedure
that ltes close to his analysis of the Basilica of Maxentius, and similar
structures. There are no external organes de dbutée, and the Jateral thrusts
of the nave vault are absorbed—visually at least—in the structure of the
aisles, whose vaults lic at mght angles to the main axis, as do the side
vaults of the Basilica of Maxentius, while the thrusts of the aisle vaults are
visibly taken up by an upstand edge-beam interposed between therm
and the main vault.* Such a procedure had Choisy’s approval

The eye takes in at one glance the vault that covers the building and the but-

tressing that supports it. Nothing that is not self-explained, the clarity of Greek

art itself
and in the eyes of his followers Notre Dame du Raincy would have the
double prestige of being Gothic and Greek at the same time.

The younger of those followers were being directed to Perret and to his
works at this time both by his direct successors like Le Corbusier, and by
independent Rationalists like Adolf Loos. He was in the process of being
elevated to the rank of a patron of the new architecture, the formal canonis-
ation coming in 1923, when a body of dissatisfied students from the Ecole
des Beaux-Arts persuaded him to set up as their maitre d atélier\9—the
actual atélier being established in one wing of an interesting building of
his, the Palais de Bois, a temporary wooden structure whose spans, in

Ee. Saint-Jean de Montmartre, a gothicising design of 1894.

1 'Thig neat and misleading description appears to be a coinage of Jamot’s.

18 The main departures from the Classical prototype are the use of a continuous
barrel vault over the main vessel of the building, and the use of posta and lintels,
instead of diaphragm walls under the troughs of the iateral vaules.

1 For an eye-witness account of this phase in Perret’s career, see the memoir
by Erné Goldfinger in the Architectural Review (London, May 1954).

lee

timber, were slightly greater than those of the Garage Ponthieu, though
admittedly less heavily loaded.

In the same year he was invited to contribute a preface to the first volume
of Morancé’s periodical L’ Architecture Vivante, which was one of the most
important recording organs of the Modern Movement, This page liminaire
took the form {and the layout) of a Classical inscription, though the phrase-
ology was hardly lapidary

LIVING ARCHITECTURE 1S THAT WHICH FAITHFULLY EXPRESSES ITS TIME WE SHALL

SEEK IT IN ALL DOMAINS OF CONSTRUCTION WE SHALL CHOOSE WORKS THAT

STRICTLY SUBORDINATED TO THEIR USE AND REALISED BY THE JUDICIOUS USE OF

MATERIAL ATTAIN BEAUTY BY THE DISPOSITION AND HARMONIOUS PROPORTIONS

Of THE NECESSARY ELEMENTS OF WHICH THEY ARE COMPOSED

MCMXXTII AUGUSTE PERRET

and contained nothing, beyend the offer to go to ‘all domains of con-
struction’, that Choisy and Guadet might not have approved.

Perret’s later development towards full Classicism, lies beyond the scope
of the present study psychologically, since it had no appreciable influence
on the development of the Modern Movement, while his work on the
rationalisation and standardisation of building elements lies beyond ita
scope in time, not taking notable form until 1930 in his Garde-Meuble
Nationale. His importance in the present context is as a teacher and example
to the next generation, and as the man whe, more than any other, made
reinforced concrete acceptable as a visible building material in the eyes of
those who practised architecture as an art, and did so by endowing it with
an easily recognised, and easily digested, rectangular aesthetic.

4: England: Lethaby and Scott

SPEAKING TO THE Architectural Association, London, im 1g15, W. R.
Lethaby preposed that one of the things that might be learned from
Germany was
.., how ta appreciate English originality. Up to about twenty years ago there
had been a very remarkable development of English art of all kinds. For five
or six years round about the year rgoo, the German Government had attached
to tts Embassy in London an expert architect, Herr Muthesius, who became the
historian (in German) of the English Free Architecture, Al! the architects who
at that time did any building were investigated, sorted, tabulated and, I must
say, understood. Then, just as our English free building arrived, or at least
‘very nearly did’, there came a timid reaction and the re-emergence of the
catalogued styles, It is equally true or even more true that the advances in
German industrial design have been founded on the English Arts and Crafts.
This characteristic piece of Lethaby’s prose, loosely organised but by no
means artless, entangles two issues that are really independent of one an-
other, though one can well see how a feeling that some virtue had gone out
of English architecture, might become coupled with the feeling that it had
gone with Muthesius to the adoptive Fatherland of the Arts and Crafts.
Indeed, the synchronisation of the stages of decline in England and of
advance in Germany is so close that it is all too easy to suppose a connection.
Thus the foundation of the Deutscher Werkbund in 1907 had been
preceded by Thomas Graham Jackson’s denunciation of Art Nouveau in
1906 and was followed in 1908 by an attack on the Glasgow School in the
Architectural Review. Qne must suspect that one of the reasons for the
English decline was a failure to see that Glasgow Art Nouveau was a part
of the ‘English Free Architecture’, and not an opposition movement,
Sensitivity about this decline is apparent in the Review as early as 1909.
Our reputation in domestic architecture, on which we are wont to pride our-
selves, is being taken away... . A writer in the Architectural Record, New York,
criticising our special issue—which, it will be remembered, was devated to
domestic architecture, pines for variety and complains of a lack of rational
development,
In 1911, the year of the completion of Gropius’s Fagus factory, the Review
first gave prominence to a ‘catalogued style’ in an article by A. E. Richard-


son entitled ‘Le Style Neo-Grec’. An eulogistic study of Schinkel followed
in the next year, and the trend, exemplifted in both these articles towards
(2), a revival of neo-Classicism and (5), a dependence on foreign, not
native, models, is fully confirmed by ancther article later in the same year
‘Architecture from the Classic Standpoint’, unsigned, but Richardsonian
in tone and Guadetesque in attitude, e.g.

The great fault in mederm art is the lack of studied composition.
However, the drift of the argument is anti-Parisian

France, for centuries the Academy of Europe, is allowing the Classical spirit
to be usurped by base modern tendencies . . . the fooleries of the Grand Palais,
the ormamental excrescences of the Gare d’ Orléans, have captured the imagina-
tion of the present generation.

and salvation is believed to lie in ‘the reticence of the Anglo-Saxon’ and in
an appeal to Rome

Now, with the establishment of the British School at Rome, we can Jook to the
future with hope, because the importance of the Clasetc spirit to modern
architectural development is at length receiving attention.

The appearance of such wooden sentiments in a magazine that had once
been more or less the mouthpiece of the Lethaby connection, illustrates a
change not only in editorial policy (it had been changing ever since 1905,
when Mervyn Macartney took over editorship) but also a general change
m the intellectual climate of English architecture. That change also dates
from 19c4~5, and involves the almost simultaneous completion of the
Ritz Hotei, by Meweés and Davis, the new wing of the British Museum, by
John Burnet, and the Central Hall, Westminster, by Lanchester and
Rickards. The conception of all three was Classicising, academic and
French, and to the rising generation of English architects, of whom H. 8.
Goodhart-Rendel seems typical, they exhibited ‘Expertise Restored’. The
changed direction continued to 1914 and beyond; the Architectural Review
sustained it in 1914 with articles by A. E, Richardson on Jean-Charles
Krafft and Jacques Hittorf, and confirmed the tendency away from Paris
in an enthusiastic review of by far the most interesting product of this
period and trend, Geoilrey Scott's Architecture of Humanism.

Scott's book marks the culmination of the Classicising tendency, the
apex of his generation’s revolt against Victorian earnestness, insularity and
empiricism. It is both implicitly and explicitly hostile te Lethaby, marks
the late intrusion into architectural criticism of the tradition of donnish
aestheticism that stems from Walter Pater, and probably suffered a condign
fate in becoming the aesthetic hand-book of the neo-Georgian and Play-
boy phases of English architecture. But it is of more than provincial
interest, for though it lies outside the mainstream of architectural thought,
it Ulustrates explicitly certain processes that took place below the surface

of the mainstream, and it illumines both the strengths and weaknesses of
the free style of the Lethaby connection.

Lethaby’s own position was never as explicit as Scott’s. He and his con-
nection were not systematic thinkers, but men of feeling, who carried the
moralistic attitude of Ruskin and Morris forward into the new century, and
made a present of it to the German movement. But Lethaby himself, at
least, marries this morality to a Rationalist interest in construction and
engineering. His work contains echoes of Viollet-le-Duc

These ribs and bars and shafts are all at bowstring tenston; a mason will tap a
pillar to make its strese audible; we may think of a cathedral as 30 ‘high-strung’”
that if struck it would give a musical note.

and of Choisy

A fine fishing-rod, a well-tuned fiddle, have their just proportions; and Gothic

architecture was developed not by any aesthetic view of the proportions, but by

getting the nerved vault, the ramping buttress and the stone-barred window to

do the utmost possible.
The comparison with non-architectural design in this last quotation is
typical of him. He desired an architecture without affectation, created in the
satisfaction of understood needs, and so he frequently turns to objects like
railway viaducts and bicycles whose value, for him, lay ‘in their nearness
to need’. Such design he termed scientific, and it must be observed that the
use of the term is far less improper in his case than in Guadet’s.

What I do urge, in the simplest and piaimest words, ig concentration on practical,

experimental and scientific education.

The method of design to a modern mind can only be understood in the ecientific,

or engineer's sense, as a definite analysis of possibilities-~not as a vague poetic

dealing with poetic matters.
These passages, with their emphasis on experiment and analysis, come from
a lecture given by him in 1gi0 at the RIBA The Architecture of Adventure,
an apotheosis of the activities of engineers and scientists—notably Sir
Christopher Wren, a native, not foreign Classicist—in architecture. But
it would appear from other writings and lectures of his that his admiration
went—as did that of many other architects—only to the mental disciplines
of engineering. He is contemptuous of the practical disciplines that com-
plement and make possible the intellectual ones.

Human work, 7 sey, not machine-grinding. Machining ia no more real work

than hand-organ noises are real music.
in view of this hostility, one cannot but wonder whe was the author of
a remarkable anonymous note contributed to the Architectural Review for
July 1905. The tone of the opening paragraph suggests a source close to
Lethaby, and the use of his contemptuous tag ‘Architects’ Architecture’
confirms it. But the forceful tone and directness of statement outbid him

Why ahould we architects live in perpetual rebellion with the present? We talk

about picking up the thread of architectural tradition where it was broken. Is it
not really an excuse to go back a couple of hundred years or so, that we may
get away from the needs and conditions and stern realities of modern life? We
cannot 80 quietly leave out centuries of history, nor ia the thread of naticanal
tradition so easily broke, history will see to that,

‘The scientists have been truer to their generation. The impressive dignity, the
beauty, the perfect fitnesa and the style of a modern express locomotive is
incomparahly finer than the best work of the best architect of today.

If only we could build with the same fitnesa, the same ecierice, the same unchal-
lenged acceptance of modern material and modern conditions, and the same
sincerity; if we could only think of cur building as an entirely modern problem
without precedent {and it ig an entirely modern problem without precedent)
just as the railway engine is, then, without doubt the same beauty, the same
serene dignity would inevitably accompany our efforts, and the ruins of the
past might crumble to dust but the architectural tradition would remain with
us still, We must begin at the foundation and not at the cornice. We must put
aboriginal constructive force into our work, and Jeave it to speak for itself:
tricky combinations of style and smart inventions ere fools" play,

The grave yawns for Architects’ Architecture.

The demands of our tasteless clients for plate glass fronts and the lke are
rational enough; but we, schooled from our apprenticeship in traditions and
unreality, rebel against any problem that cannot be solved by traditional
methods.

We are ashamed of cur nakedness—and yet it is in the confession of our
nakedness that our regeneration lies.

In conctusion, let it be said that only the aboriginal force in any building can
be called architecture, and to introduce any form that is not contemporary is to
hinder progress and the true expression of the modern in architecture.

This uncompromising and radical statement of faith, which pre-echoes
nearly all the significant moral and intellectual attitudes of the ensuing
quarter-century of architectural thought, shows how close to the main-
stream of development the English Free architecture could have been.
The dramatic reduction of that Free architecture to a mere provincial ver-
nacular, in competition with a provincial version of Beaux-Aris Classicism,
is 2 singular example of failure of nerve and collapse of creative energy.
To some extent this may be due to muddled thinking and squeamishness—
the failure to identify the Glasgow School as an ally, or to accept machine
production, are examples of the squeamishness. The muddled thinking is
exemplified by the case of C. F. A. Voysey.4 His domestic architecture is
the ultimate proof of the importance and value of the Free Style, and
through Muthesius and others it had a critical influence on the develop-

* In Voysey’s defence it should be said that other members and supporters of the
English Free architecture were capable of being quite as muddle-headed as he.
Lethaby, for instance, went on record with his contempt for ‘mouldy Picturesque’
and Muthesius was equally acathing about it, in spite of the fact that the Free
architecture they so much admired was more the product of the Picturesque than
ef anything else, and was in many ways no more advanced than early Picturesque
architecture had been. A late tenant of John Nash's pioneer and highly Picturesque
free-plan dower-house at Cronkhill (1804) expressed his admiration of it to the
author in terme that would heave gratified any Free Architect of 1990—'It is very
convenient.’ Choisy’s admiration for the Picturesque is something that other
Rationalista might profitably have emulated (and in the case of Le Corbusier,
profitably did).

ment of the Modern Movement. Yet it is common hearsay knowledge that
Voysey’s own intention was only to improve and continue the native cottage
vernacular of southern England. He had no conception of the importance
of what he was doing (he seems to have had that almost pathological
modesty of some English provincial intellectuals) and angrily deprecated
any attempt te link his name with the Modern Movement. Under these
circumstances it should not surprise us that his practices and aims should
be aesthetically at variance with one another. His work excels by the sharp
definition of one smooth plain surface from another, the fine precision of
his arrises and the bold geometry of his forms, and yet he was quoted in
1go8 as saying that he preferred

The soft effect of the outline of an old building where the angles were put up

bv eye, compared with the mechanical effect of the modern drafted angle,
Even without such muddled thinking, the pure empiricism of the free style
would have been difficult to pass on. An endless perspective of ad hoe
decisions, based on first principles and personal responsibility, for the whole
of one’s career is much less attractive than a neat package of cut-and-dried
answers such as a Beaux-Arts training could offer, and only a rigorous
moral and intellectual discipline—such as the free style acquired in Ger-
many—could have made it convincing enough to be transmissible, But its
masters were mostly coasting along on the accumulated moral momentum
of the previous epoch. Worse still, the masters of the previous generation,
like Norman Shaw, were turning full Classicist in their old age (Regent
Street, Gaiety Theatre) and lending their authority to the restoration of
French expertise. The buildings that possessed this expertise offered suave
new aesthetic pleasures of a superficial kind, plus a certain snob appeal,
and the generality of the smart young London architects were soon full of
contempt for the masters of the Art Nouveau and the free style—Goodhart
Rendel's satirical wit is at its best on Mackintosh and Voysey, but of
Lethaby he cannot even bring himself to be funny.

But, as has been said, a desire to return to Italian fundamentals is mixed
with this admiration for France. The foundation of the British School in
Rome gave this desire an institutional body, Geoffrey Scott gave it an
intellectual head. The Architecture of Humanism, was written in Florence,
the traditional home of Anglo-Saxon far aiente, but if its tendency is to
preach 2 kind of architectural irresponsibility, it is neither a trivial book nor
a superficial one, It is the by-praduct, so to speak, of a serious and respec-
table academic programme of work

My intention had been to formulate the chief principles of Classical design

in architecture
and one whole chapter out of the nine that compose the book is devoted to a
devious defence of the academic tradition. It must be said that by the time
Scott has finished defending it, the academic tradition has become almost

TE aah ety

pee _—- Ss = *: . we a re - ae a: I

. > —-_ _ i ‘ , ethane} : , ~~ i- —* ” |
a 4 tf = shard ae en ee
oe 1-: aa *: re a “* vant os

a. . eeew | ei —_ ie. «8 eee ot.

ro
or
-- I

a

a . LJ
¥ 7 ' '
nn aie
ae . om jo
nd =! ™
- = .
. ie} 7
a re - «
oe .
> an 7 - .
. 7
i” a
. t
t
——

ee lad

Laue ee

Pee be Ses

Po ee
woaes

[

- + He oe eH oF

a;

. gh

1, Tony Garnier. Project for a national bank, Prix de
Rome-winning design of 1899. French academic plan-
ning at its most skilful and systematic, the plan ‘cor
posed’ of ‘elements’ according to Guadet's precepts by
his most brilliant pupil,

FO ae Fy sos i, oe oe * bok grape pee ee =
ae oer er nL eee 8 See io

eo ‘ deen 1 . i] .

nepal Sererya
|

2. Sirot, Project for a national bank, unsuccessful Prix
de Rome entry of 1899. Elementary composition even
more clearly displayed in pian.

a -
ae —
"]

te - |

“Fi
3 em
Hh a 7

CT poet. : : : root bog: oer!
ail be | Poiop fo: pialg ,
' 4 i ' * : .
i | LY ‘ ‘ 3 “4 + oe i Sanne i
Po eer eran ' 2 ampere anin arn
' - 1 I . 1 H
+4 I oo a a4. ' i ‘a
1 | i
as

3- Walter Gropius and Adelf Meyer. Ptan of the Fagus
factory, Alfeld, 1911-1913. Elementary composition
according to a purely functional discipline.

a + abo.

ieee erie ee mernene S )/ Om SAME AAT
DN cal RE a Ra de ae a ge

4. Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer. Pian of the
Werkbund Pavilion, Cologne, 1914. Elementary
composition according ta academic precepts.

g. Walter Gropius. Plan of the Bauhaus buildings,
Dessau, 1926, Elementary composition according to
Elementarist precepts.

aGete

Eyetenson — tpage does Ft he

sth hah

[fe em me

te I
i Evebeader a | | | |

- \
' r
J acnnal]

- : tI
bead |

=e at

meager
to

SPORTE FIELD


are a Peduire léditice kh ses parties agiasantes, Privé des
moyens puissauts, il ¥ supplée 4 force de combinaisons.

Larehitecture gothique est celte d'une société & ressources

aes evangues, dautre iy la lecture dea épltres el & la prédi-
cation.

Lensembfe. — La fg. 23 montre, d'aprés les dispositions
ictuellement existantes de Saint-Clément de Rome, l'espect

Cun cheur latin; |'édifice a ét4 remanid au 9" sidcle, mais fous

6. Auguste Chotsy, The
Parthenon, a plate from
his Ffistoire de
Pdrchitecture (1898),
showing his
characteristic mode of
projecting a simplified
version of the building in'
section, clevation and ,
plan.

7. Auguste Choisy.
Flying buttresses, from
the Mustotre, the facts of
stmicture reduced to
diagrammatic and

insubstantial form,

8. Auguste Choisy. The
choir of San Clemente
frorn the Mistoire: a
simplified rendering of
liturgical furniture that
appears to have done a
good deal to suggest a
sumplifted architecture.

9. Tony Garnier. La Cité Industrielle, imaginary town-planning
project, 1904-1918. A city laid out according to the concept of
elementary composition, with the residential ‘element’ in the centre,
imdustrial ‘element’ lower right,

me. Tony Garnier. Refrigerator Tower of the abattoir, Grands
Travaux deta Ville de Lyon, ca. 191 3. The stripped classicism of an
advanced academic architect.

11. Paul Guadet. House im the Boulevard Murat, 1910: stripped
classicism in the academic tradition.


12. Auguste Perret, Apartment block in the Rue
Franklin, Paris, 1904; 4 pioneer ize of reinforced
conerete in domestic work, notable for the ingenuity of
its hollow U-frented plan and the clear exhibition of its
frame constructton, althuugh beth structural and infill
materials are clad in cerarme tiling,

13. Auguste Perret, Graruge in the Rue Ponthieu, Paris,
1906; exposed concrete construction, within the
discipline of the stripped Classicism of the academies.

¥4. Auguste Perret. Part-sectional drawing of the frame of the Thédtre des Champs
Elysées, dated 1913. Although the credit of the design of the whole building goes,
in part, to Henry van de Velde, the frame is undoubtedly Perret’s, and exemplifies
his manner of handling concrete as if its nature resembled that of wood.

|
i
F]

1) i

15, Auguste Perret. Church of
Notre Dame, Le Rainey, 1923: an.
elaborate (and influential) :
tealigation of Choisy's

Rationalism in terms of
reinforced concrete.

16. Walter Gropius and Adolf
Mever. Fagus factory, Alfeld,
FORT-1913 2 south-western comer
of the workshop block, showing
the famous glazed corner.

rz. Walter Gropius and Adolf
Meyer. Fagus factory, Alfeld,
FOEI-I913: the very advanced
treatment of the workshop block
is in contrast to the design of the
other elements of the compositicn.
18,19. Bruno Taut. Steel Industry
Pavilion, Le:pzig, 1913, and Glass
Pavilion, Cologne, to14; twa
structures intended to display the
nature of the material they
advertised. The Glass Pavilion is
one of the most advanced concepts
of its time,


ar

ye a) Nara "ana

a

ap
“Oy van au

ane
a: .

20. Max Berg. Jahrhunderthaile, Breslau, 1913. The
least mhibited employment of remforced concrete ina
non-industrial building in the first 30 years of the
century, ranking with Taut's Glass Pavilion tn
otiwinality,

23,22. Hana Poelzig.
Water tower, Posen, 190;
and Chemucal factory,
Laban, 1911. Poelzig may
be taken as the header of the
Werkbund Expressionists,
and both these works
devinte notably from the
ism of the other
wing of the Werkbund.
(2g. Albert Marx. Boiler
|House, Had Nauheim,
| #972: Werkbund
| Expressionism betraying
some of its Art Nouveau

atigins,

aa ge


24. Heinrich Stoffregen. Anker
linoleum factory, Delmenharst,
igl2:a tough-minded version of :
Werkbund Expressionism almest.
comparable to;

ag. Peter Behrens. AEG Heavy
erection hall, Berlin, 1912, butnog
tas
26, Peter Behrens. AE(; Turbine |
erection hall, Berlin, 1908, his
first, and most classical, factory
building for AEC;,

hog :
Bhhig ai
ag:


27. Peter Behrens. Buildings for the gasworks, Frankfurt am
Main, 1911: a rare departure from classical models in Behrens’
industrial work before 1914.

28. Walter Gropius. Farm-workers’ housing, Jankow, 1906.


-
*.

tl

tee
(
y.|

— — a  — -

_—_ —

Ly LL
away

crvertmicitas | ¥

Heat,

‘
. * \

ALY

was


“syOog asayl ju Aon Aq ayHU Ay 01 YIEQ sss 34 WED UOT LAB, PUN YIa Ay BY) JO JUOI ay) JO WOM yA

ay) Waa nus a4 Aq paysiiqnd syooq-anioid ow) aup ue Agaiys papuadop ‘ausn[o-5 Je HOM 8 JadayA] pur enidausy

Ul a[qlala ealuodad YSIt YStyas 2y RE yy fo souanyul uRedoing aty, “Gobr “far uoerpay ‘paoTy “Ysa, PAY] quBs,y 1f

“(G2 “Hig 73) MOTT IYKS GLUE OL} 38 IN] OUTLIG] 96 JET} WEY] PasuUBApE seal ‘TaAoMOY ‘st Yo “eee fo Jus

-Ao]duue 34) Wo payeQUssueS ERY TUSLWOS peot> pare ‘eyed ayy jo say439 BuLaytp ayy Jo aeneoaq weTEddeE Apaaug sy CF By *J5)
cape ony JO MISIOFRRET TY any ‘eUOT BARS S43 UY "PLO ‘sUeO[6r ‘woNfaRg puncyady “saXopy JOpy pus-snrdosg zeapayy “ol ‘oe


32, Adolf Loos. Steiner Flouse,
Vienna, 1910: view from the garden,
contrasting the square, almost
Classical handling of the garden

front with the rounded roofline of the.
street side.

33. Adolf Loos, ‘Tzara House, Paris,
1926 (photograph reworked to show.
intended final state). (ne of Loos’
most sophisticated designs, yet

taking a tinge of local Montmartre
character—ef. fig. 38.

.
a eee


non-existent. ‘The main product of that tradition as it stood at the time that
Scott was writing (1911-14) was the body of theary epitomized in Guadet,
but

An academic tradition, allied, as it was in the Renaissance, to a living sense of
aft, is fruitful, but academic theery is at all times barren,

Indeed, all that seems to remain, with him, of that tradition is the right to
ignore the precepts of the only academic writer he discusses—Vitruvius,
Nevertheless this tenuous body of academic tradition could achieve great
things.
The academic influence rescued the architecture of England and France, It
provided a canon of forms by which even the uninspired architect could secure
at least a measure of distinction, and genius, where it existed, could be trusted
to use this scholastic learning as a means, not as an end... .
This is clearly something very like Goodhart Rendel’s restored expertise
which guaranteed, on the security of the accumulated expérience of the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts, that

if the pupil chose to experiment, he experimented with his feet on firm ground

though ‘experiment’ manifestly does not mean here what it meant for
Lethaby, but something purely formalistic.

However, as has been said above, the Archttecture of Humanism was a
deviation from the original aim of writing an academic handbook. The
reason for this deviation was Scott’s feeling that Classical architecture
could not be appreciated, much less understood, by his countrymen be-
cause their judgement had been clouded by a number of erroneous archi-
tectural criteria, or fallacies, which he lists, before setting out to demolish-
ing them, as the Romantic, the Picturesque, the Naturalistic, Mechanical,
Ethical and Biological Fallacies. His attempted demolitions do not appear
very convincing now, partly because they were—more or less in the order
listed—the frames of mind that had saved Victorian architecture from
stagnation and sterility, and partly because he normally attacks hearsay
versions of these theories without poing back to original sources. ‘Thus,
unacquainted with Choisy at first hand, and ignorant of Choisy’s extension
of technique to cover the whole fabric of society, he can only confess him-
self amazed that Professor Moore who ‘bases his whole treatment quite
consistently upon a mechanical ideal of architecture’ can yet preface his
work ‘by a rapid and liturgical recitation of all the ethical formulae’, since
he regards these two approaches as utteriy opposed (Scott's italics).

He himself is quite consistent, however, and does not defend Renais-
sance architecture by an appeal to sources (though he appears to have
consulted, e.g. Alberti, Serlio and Palladia) but in terms of academic theory
as it existed in his own time, stripped of moral and social overtones.
Going only a littl way beyond Guadet’s indifference to particular styles,
and thus to particular symbolic and narrative contents, he shrugs off all

symbolic and narrative qualities and offers instead an architecture of pure
form. He defines his position thus
Architecture, simply and immediately perceived, is a combination, revealed
through light and shade, of spaces, masses and lines,
and this puts him very close ta certain post-War theorists of Abstract art
who also took the view that simple and immediate perception took in only
the formal or geometrical aspects of the object seen, As with later Abstract
theorists he also took this simple and immediate perception to be absolute
and fundamental.

These few elements make the core of our architectural experience; an experi-
ence which the Hverary fancy, the historical imagination, the casuistry of con-
acience, the calculations of science, cannot constitute or determine, though
they may encircle or enrich,

The ‘few’ elements mentioned above are later rendered as ‘four’ by Scott

By the direct agency of Mass, Space, Line and Coherence upon our physical

consciousness, architecture communicates its value as an art.

Such are the four great elermenta of building frorn whose laws the finest masters

of the Renaissance, hawever various their impulse and achievement, did not

deviate, Theirs is an architecture which by Mass, Space and Line responds to

human physical delight, and by coherence answers ta our thought.
The formation of this concept has a complex background. It is clear that
French academic theory has been laid under tribute both on the architec-
tural side and the painterly. If elements comes from Guadet so does
coherence, which Scott uses to mean either an acceptance of mathematical
order, or simply composition. The connection between this coherence and
thought sounds like Charles Blanc’s

The painter's prime means of expressing his thought is ‘ordonnance’

and the insistence on fine, one of the factors that responds to Auman
physical delight recalls Blanc’s

Straight or curved, horizontal or vertical, parallel or divergent—all lines have

a secret relationship with our feelings
It is not necessary to refer these ideas back to direct French academic
sources; not only were Beaux-Arts ideas on architecture current in England
in the decade before the War, but ideas on painting, from a similar source,
had been put in circulation by Roger Fry and his circle.

But there is a new ‘element’ among Scott's four—Space. This was not
being discussed in architectural circles in France at the time, neither with-
in the Beaux-Arts curriculum as recorded by Guadet, nor by Choisy and his
followers. Choisy uses the word espace to mean an area to be spanned by
an arch or covered by a roof, and where we might nowadays use the word
‘space’ te indicate an unbuilt volume within a building he is more tnclined
to use la vide. By Space, Scott means, effectively, Raum, with most of the over-
tones that the word had acquired in German aesthetics, and he himself had


avowedly taken it over from the writings of Theodor Lipps, along with the
theory of Einfithiung.

Lippsian theory seems to have been common currency in the Anglo-
Florentine circle in which he moved (Berenson, Vernon Lee et af.}? and it
is used by Scott to give a show of objectivity to the extremely solipsistic
attitude he is taking up, viz., that architecture affects us by its mimic cor-
respondence with human attitudes and actions. His position depends, on
examimation, on a kind of pun on the word ‘Humanist’, which he uses
indiscriminately to refer either to the world of humane learning, or to the
projection of human sentiments into the forms of architecture. This
double-entendre appears to be quite unconscious, but it is upon it, and no-
thing else, that his theory of Renaissance architecture as an art of pure
form, pure taste and pure pleasure is founded. Presumably the material,
from which Professor Wittkower later developed his entirely different view
of Renaissance architecture as an art of symbolic form, was also available to
Scott had he wanted to use it, but, under the academic dispensation which
set symbolic and narrative values aside, he could explain his liking for
Renaissance architecture only by assuming it to be meaningless at any but
the empathetic level.

But in his borrowing of the idea of Raumempfindung from Lipps, and his
introduction of it into the context of academic theory, he achieved an
innovation. The introduction was not seminal, but it retains its interest
as an illustration of a process which must have happened elsewhere, though
not explicitly. The change-over from the Lippsian idea of space, as felt
volume, which is the sense it has in the writings of, e.g. Muthesius, to
the later concept of space as a three-dimensional continuum, capable of
metrical subdivision, without sacrifice of its continuity, appears to depend
largely from its assimilation to the Blanc/Guadet idea of composition, and
the extension of that idea to operate in three dimensions instead of the two
dimensions of the building-plan or the picture surface, both of which are
two-dimensional fields metrically subdivided without sacrifice of their con-
tinuity. Such ideas are manifest-—if not verbally explicit—in the work of
both Mies van der Rohe and Le Corbusier after about 1923. The routes by
which they acquired such ideas are devious, but it seems fairly certain that
somewhere along the route, a fusion of Lippsian and academic ideas, on
the Scott pattern, must have taken place.

* Scott came in contact with this circle as Berenson’s librarian, and the currency
of Lippsian ideas among this connection will be found discussed in an appendix
to Arnold Whittick's book Hrie Mendelsohn (London, 2nd edition, 1956).

5: Germany: industry and the Werkbund

THE YEAR 1907 must appear, in retrospect, a decisive one for German (and,
by that token, international} architecture. If no new themes are introduced
inte architectural thought, attitudes toward certain contemporary problems
were as resolutely taken up as they were, a little later, by the Futurists, and
what is more—were shortly translated inte practice, That is to say,
discussion and exposition among architects and those connected with design
were primarily devoted to evolving programmes and organisations for im-
mediate action, and not to the formulation of bodies of encyclopaedic
theory in the manner of Choisy or Guadet. There was indeed a parallel
current of pure intellectual speculation about the aesthetics of architecture,
descending from Lipps and producing one of its classics in Worringer’s
Abstraktion und Eimnfiihlung of 1908, but there seems to have been no impor-
tant mingling of the two streams of thought—the men of action tapped the
Lippsian stream at source, not at Worrmger.

The heart-theme of the practical body of thought was the problem of
mechanism—or rather, the relationship of architecture, as an art of design,
to mechanical production at all its phases, from the factory work-hall to
the advertising of the finished product. This relationship was scrutinised
most closely at two critical points: the aesthetics of engineering construc-
tion, and the aesthetics of product design. To take the first point first,
leaders of German architectural thought, like the Italian Futurists, de-
plored the application of art-work to engimeering structures, but whereas
the Futurists intended to conjure an aesthetic out of machinery and engin-
eertng, the Germans hoped to conjure some aesthetics into them,

Already, therefore, in 1907, the Verband Deutscher Architekten- und Ingenieur-

tereing was challenging expert opinion on this point: How shall we force up the

importance of aesthetic considerations in engineering construction to a higher
level than at present.
Phrased thus, as a sort of collision between two separate entities, aesthetics
and engineering, the problem tended to indicate two equally separate
answers, a3 Lindner and Steinmetz go on to record

We soon saoived at the conchuion that eny solution for cur new situation

involved the discovery of a new, appropriate and heartfelt mode of expression.

The architecture of the styles having broken down, everybody changed their

aim and began to shoot in different directions. Some preached Pure Functional

Art (Reine Zweckkunst) while others saw the ideal in untrametled artistic crea-

tion ‘each according to his own powers’ finding new forme for new problema.
This latter paragraph identifies, perhaps unwittingly, a basic division in the
work of the years immediately after 1907. Lindner and Steinmetz associate
‘new forms for new problems’ with “untramelled artistic creation’ and not
with ‘Pure Functional Art’ and it is to be noted that those most closely
associated with the pure service of function—Behrens, Muthesius, Mies
van der Rohe and Gropius (with one notable exception’}—were not for-
mally inventive, while the Individualists, later termed Expressionists, of
that generation in Germany—Poelzig, Berg, Marx, Stoffregen—were
among the most fertile creative minds in their profession at that time, and
the most vigorous continuers of the spirit of the English Free architecture.
It should be emphasised here that this division of practical method does
not imply, at that time, any notable division of theoretical approach—that
did not appear until after 1922, when Zweckkunst finally acquired a formal
language of its own—nor any difference of organisational loyalty, All these
architects were connected with the Werkbund, and the two whom it is
most customary to contrast; Hans Poelzig and Peter Behrens, both en-
joyed the support of Hermann Muthestus, the Werkbund’s founder.

But, in any case, it was events connected with the Werkbund and with
Peter Behrens that made 1907 a decisive year, rather than the beginnings of
a stylistic diviston among the progressive German architects. For it was in
1907 that Behrens joined AEG (Allgemeine Electricitdtspesellschaft) and
Mauthesius founded the Deutscher Werkbund. The two events are related,
if not connected, and are the two faces of the same coin—a rapprochement
between creative designers and productive industry, in which industry was
a more willing participant than the designers.

The foundation of the Werkbund took place ia the teeth of some fairly
spirited opposition from the ‘establishment’ of the German Arts and
Crafts Movernent, and Muthesius’s success is a tribute to his diplomacy, as
well as his determination and his influential supporters. He was held in
suspicion for a variety of reasons. As a Prussian civil servant who regarded
himself as an instrument in the furtherance of German economic policy,
he naturally stood for order and discipline, and not for the Bohemian
individualism and aestheticism of the loosely organised German Kumnst-
fewerbe craftsmen and designers. Furthermore, he seems to have been
regarded as the importer of a foreign style to be imposed on German Arts
and Crafts. This arose naturally from his having been in England from
1896 to 1903 a8 a supplementary trade attaché to the German Embassy,

1The exception being Behrens’s remarkable gas-works buildings at Frankfurt

am Main, which atand well away from the line of development tawarda a chastened
neo-Classiciam that characteriees bis other work of the period.

with a brief to study and report back on the high prestige of English archi-
tecture and design. His reports covered not only domestic and church
architecture, but teaching methods as well—even amateur work done in
evening classes. His masterpiece as rapporteur was undoubtedly Das
Englische Haus, which covered, in three volumes of which the last appeared
in 1g05, every aspect of the English free style from Stokesey Castle to
Sanitary Ware. The impact of this book can be seen as early as Peter
Behrens’s Obenauer House of 1g06, and persisted until it was overtaken
by the Wasmuth publications of the work of Frank Lloyd Wright. Thus
these attempts to weld industry and the unattached artists and designers
into a single, effective organisation that could make a useful contribution te
the national economy were regarded in some quarters as an attack on
German art.

The polemical situation came to a head in the early part of ige7.
Muthesius opened with a speech at the new Commercial College in Berlin
(of which he was then head) in the course of which he complained of the
superficiality of the ‘so-called style’ then in use in German Kunstgewerbe,
but his complaint has an economic basis, As Peter Bruckmann (a pro-
gressive industrialist who employed designers like Lauvwericks) reports

He prophesied a sharp economic recession if the motifs used im the shaping

of their products continued to be thoughtlessly and shamelessly borrowed from

the form-treasury of the previous century.

What Muthesius put forth publicly in this tecture was vigorously rebutted both

by the Crafts and Industry, and the Verband fiir die wirtschafilichen Interessen

des Kunstgewerbes in Berlin battled fiercely against him, putting on the earder-

paper for their meeting of June 1907 an item headed “Der Fatl Muthesius’.
Breckmann himself took part in this meeting as an interested party, Not
that he was in any personal way connected with Muthesius, but

E felt in Diisseldorf that a change was imminent, and that there should be

representatives from Industry for Muthesius and his ideas. . . . On the Muthe-

siua case, the Chairman made play with the complaints of Industry and the

Crafts, calling him their traducer and enemy of German art... Dohrn, Lux,

and myself confronted the whole assembly, which we left in complete uproar,

This Congress took place in June, yet as early as the syth of Gctober the

Deutscher Werkbund was founded. How was it passible to achieve this object

80 quickly?

Bruckmann’s question must be rhetorical, rather than naive, since he must
have known as well as anybody, as a representative from progressive
industry, why things had moved so quickly between June and October.
Major German industrial enterprises were becoming interested in quality
products and better design, 23 witness the appointment in the same month
of October of Peter Behrens as design consultant for everything that AEG
built, manufactured or printed. Nor were AEG alone in this; wherever
German industries had set up selling organisations they soon turned to
designers—as in the case of the Stahlwerksverband and their employment
of Bruno Taut—for their publicity material if nothing else. From the other


——

side, the more responsible section of the German Kunstgewerbe movement,
the Deutsche Werkstatten, had already in 1906 begun to develop furniture
for masa production, and was associated with the Werkbund from its in-
ception. Bruno [aul,* the designer of this furniture was appointed in 1907
as head of the Berlin Gewerbeschule—an appointment in which Muthesius
must have been as much interested as that of Behrens te AEG, though there
seems to be no record of his having directly influenced either appointment,

In any case, the whole tendency to a union of crafts and industry was
given urgency by the economic situation and national interest. Muthesius
had issued his warning in 1907, but Karl Schmidt, the director of the
Deutsche Werkstatten at Hellerau, had warned before him, in 1903, that
German industrial products were so inferior that

Within a year we might be hard put to buy sufficient raw material from abroad
to keep running, and the social problem would then become sharper and
sharper until it (se. design) was no Jonger just a cultural problem.

and it was this same economic situation that gave force to Muthesius’s
insistence that the problem

was not the buainess of a single government office, but a concern worthy of the

German people az a whole.
Now, Karl Schmidt’s condemnation of German industrial production had
been phrased in general terms; he merely says that it is stnderwertig, with-
out specifying in what aspects it is deficient in quality. This was to be
expected; as head of the Hellerau Werkstitten he spoke from within the
Arts and Crafts tradition of not distinguishing between visual and material
quality in products, of believing them to be automatically related. Muthe-
sius, in complaining of the ‘so-called style’ used in German Kunsfgewerbe
is clearly on a different tack. But for the first few years of the Werkbund’s
existence, it followed Schmidt’s more generalised approach and made
Oualiid?? its watchword, In this condition the most that can be said was
that it was a triumph of organisation—an influential part of German pro-
duction by machine and hand had been brought within the scope of a single
body, and within that body, the attention of industry had been drawn to the
availability of a body of independent designers, the attention of designers
and craftsmen had been drawn to the opportunities that existed for them in
industry, while the problem of design, at large, had been brought to the
attention of the German nation, But it lacked, as yet, any specific aesthetic
direction.

That came in 1911, and from Muthesius. At the Werkbund’s Congress in
that year he delivered what, in a later terminology, would be called the Key-

*On Bruno Paul, see Nikolaus Pevsner, Proneers of the Modern Movement
(London, rat edition, 1936, pp. 38, 768).

* The idea of Quatitdtsardett is also discussed in Pioneers of the Modern Move-
ment,

note speech, entitled Wo stehen wir? It was a contribution to the general
theme of the Congress ‘The Spiritualisation of German Production’, and
so closely involved is this general theme with the detailed argument in
Muthesius’s speech that it seems possible that he had a large share in decid-
ing the general theme himself. The speech is a long and complex one, its
structure is rhetorical rather than logical, but its interest to the present
study is that it introduced to the Werkbund the idea that aesthetics could
be independent of material quality, it introduced the idea of standardisa-
tion as a virtue, and of abstract form as the basis of the aesthetics of product
design, and it introduced these ideas to an audience that included not only
the young men who were going to shape the architecture of post-War
Germany—Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, Bruno Taut—but of
France as well, for Charles Edouard Jeanneret, later Le Corbusier, had
been sent to Germany in 1910 by the Art School of Chaux de Fonds
(Switzerland) to make a study of German progress in design, and of the
Werkbund in particular. At the time of the Congress he had ceased working
with Behrens, but had only transferred himself to the Werkstitte colony
at Hellerau where he was working with Heinrich Tessenow, and was still
within the Werkbund orbit. A good deal of what Muthesius said reappears,
suitably modified, in Le Corbusier’s publications of the early Twenttes.

Like the later, but apparently unrelated, Manifesto of Futurist Architec-
fure, and like that earlier work of Muthesius himself, Silarchitektur und
Baukunst,* it opens with an historical survey whose aim is to demonstrate
the decay of architecture in the nineteenth century, but here it is linked
to a more general theme of the special aptitudes and tasks of different races
of men and periods of time—a theme which reappears at the end of the
speech, made specific as the destiny of the German people to revivify the
arts of design in the twentieth century. Unitke most historical perspectives
of this kind, it ends on a note of rising optimism. A recovery had already
begun as early as 1890 for

The first clear and representative literary indication of the beginning of a new
spiritual orientation was that forceful book Rembrandt als Erzieher, which re-
called to the mind of Germany the importance of artistic as against scientific
culture.

It may be only a coincidence that Julius Langbehn® in this book alse in-
vited the German people to look for leadership in this spiritual regenera-
tion to Low Germany {a Holsteiner himself, he took Rembrandt as a Low
German) and that Peter Behrens, who so often appears as the personifica-
tion of Muthesius’s ideal designer, was a Low German too, from Hamburg.

‘An orthodox Lethabitic diatribe against the ‘catalogue styles’ (except for an
un-Leshabitic show of interest in Schinkel and neo-Classicism) published in
190
On Langbehn, see, for instance, Jethro Bithell, Modern German Literature
London, 1946, p. 497).


The foundation of the Werkbund, Muthesius proposes, had been another
etep forward in this spiritual regeneration, but

The Deutscher Werkbund was founded at a time when a close association of ail
men of good will was needed against hostile forces, Its campaigning days in that
direction are over now, the ideas that were then in question are nowhere
denied today, and enjoy general approval. Has its existence thereby become
superfluous? One could only think so by taking a narrow view of the Arts and
Crafts. ...In truth... the specific task of the Werkbund is only just beginning.
Up till now, considerations of quality stood in the forefront of our activities, and
and we can now be sure that in Germany a sense of good materials and methods
hag pained 2 swift ascendancy; but by that very tcken it follows that the work of
the Werkbund is not completed, Far higher than the material is the spiritual;
far higher than function, material and technique, stands Form. These three
material aspects might be impeccably handled but—if Form were not—we
would stil be livmg in a merely brutish world. So there remains before us as
an aim a much greater and more important task—to awaken once more an
understanding for Form, and the revival of architectonic sensibilities,

Form, as it appears here—and net for the first time in the speech—is a
thing of the spirit, but before Muthesius has finished it becomes many
other things as well; he covers, in fact, pretty well all the shades of meaning
that the word was to carry in later writings—except that of mathematically
proportioned shapes

Form that is not the reault of mathematical calculation, that is not fulfilled by
mere function, that has nothing to do with systematic thought

but if he is vague about its origins, he is precise about its manifestations

Tt is, above all, architectonic, its creation a secret of the human spirit, like
poetry and religion. Form, that is for ug an unique and shining achievement of
human art—the Greek Temple, the Roman Thermae, the Gothic Cathedral,
and the princely salon of the eighteenth century

and it will be observed that his canon of good form, while it subsumes the
Rationalist triumphs of Doric and Gothic structure, adds to them a
triumph of the shaping of interior volumes, the Roman Thermae, and a
triumph—as he saw it-—of the fruitful collaboration of the various arts, the
eighteenth-century interior. But eighteenth-century architecture had, for
him, an interest beyond that of collaboration, it was also the last time that
Form had received its due, and then with Schinkel disappeared. Schinkel’s
output therefore appeared as

something higher, more exalted, than what came after it, something that we
have subsequently lost

and lost so completely that Gottried Semper could observe, as early as the
Great Exhibition of 1851 that

taken all round, the barbaric and semi-civilised peoples have taken the lead
over the cultured ones in the arts.

Given this admiration for the eighteenth century, and particularly his
admiration for Schinkel, often expressed, it is not surprising to find that

Form, as he felt it, was a kind of geometrical essence distilled from neo-
Classical design. This is confirmed in part by the architecture of the de-
signer who stood closest to him, Peter Behrens, in whom the echoes of
neo-Classicism are as clear as they are simplified, and in part by a sug-
gestive literary parallel drawn by Muthesius himself. Towards the end of
the speech he refers contemptuously to the instability and changeability of
taste in his own lifetime, and to the fallibility of ‘-isrns’, and contrasts with
them the stability of the ‘inmost essence’ (innerste Wesen) of architecture,
which has

.. its own constancy, calm and endurance. Throughout the millenia of its
continually enriched tradition, it represents, as it were, the permanent in
human history.

This, of course, is yet another appeal to the power of tradition over the
head of the styles and Art Nouveau, but Muthesius follows it with a side-
look at other arts that gives it a new twist.

In its constancy of mind it is unfavourable to the prevailing Impressionist
approach in the other arts, In pamting, in literature, ta some extent in sculpture,
Impressionism is conceivable and has conquered these realrns of art. But the
thought of an Impressionist architecture is altogether terrible —Denken tctr ihn
wicht aus! There have already been individualistic essays in architecture that
fill us with alarm—as will the firet signs of Impressionism.

The point need not be laboured here that reactions against Impressionism
in painting were called a renaissance du sentiment classique, and that the
reaction of Maillol and other sculptors against Rodin has been termed neo-
Classical,* The chief German representative of this sentiment was Adolf
Hildebrand, though his book Problem der Form was not directed at any
named artists, but only at what he termed Positivism, that is, the concept of
truth to nature implicit in Impressionism, and the artistic anarchy, as he
saw it, that followed from it. Hildebrand makes, in short form, a linkage
between a scientific culture and a failure of architectonic sensibility, that
Muthesius makes only diffusely and at great length

It is significant of our scientific times that 3 work of art today seldam nses above
the level of imitation, The architectonic feeling is eithe: lacking entirely, or
replaced by a purely external... arrangement of forma

and it is not inconceivable that the insistence in Muthestus on such themes
as Form, Architectonic Discipline, and the importance of Space, may be
due directly to the influence of Hildebrand’s book, which had already
achieved five editions,’ two outside Germany, by 1907.

"Robert Rey ueed this phrase as the title of a book (Paris, 1931) on the anti-
Impressionist painters of the Eighteen-eighties and Nineties. The term neo-
Classica] is used for Maiilol and his connection in Gischis and Vedrés, La Seulpfure
en France depuis Rodin (Paris, 1945).

’ The first edition appeared in Strassburg in 1893; this quotation is taken from
the introduction to the New York edition of 1907,


In German literature the situation was analogous, except that the move-
ments were simultaneous, not sequential, the pioneers of both Imprea-
sionist novel-writing, and neo-Classic theatre, being men of Muthesius’s
own generation (e.g, Emil Strauss, born 1861 as was Muthesius, and Paul
Ernst only five years later). The aims, and indeed the terminology, of the
neo-Classicists are often remarkably close to those of Muthesius. Paul
Emst's book, in which their aims were set forth, was called Der Weg aur
Form,® and had appeared in igo6. It demanded the restoration, in drama,
of a logical inevitability in the action, the preservation of the Classical
unities, and the use of blank verse. ‘These tenets hardly need paraphrasing
to be made applicable to Werkbund architecture with its attempts to
develop buildings logically from their functions, its tendencies toward
simple, axial compositions, and its use of simplified neo-Classical detailing
for which ‘blank verse’ is an apt metaphor, Ernst prefigures Muthesius also
in his dernand for the exclusion of the inessential—Nebensachen auszu-
schitessen—while his couplet

Wer ist weise, wer ist gut?

Wer nach seinem Wresen tut.
might stand as 4 motto not only for Muthesius himself, but for the factories
designed by young Werkbund architects like Walter Gropius, who tried to
design according to the innerste Wesen not only of architecture, itself, but of
the functional programme with which they were confronted.

One further point about Muthesius’s rejection of Impressionism needs
to be noted here: the Individualistic essays that alarmed him so much are,
presumably, to be equated with Lindner and Steinmetz’s class of designers
who opted for untrammedled artistic creation, and were therefore, Expres-
sionists, not Impressronists. Muthestus shows himself less perceptive here
than Worringer who, also in 1911, actually coined the word Expressionist
to describe, roughly, what Roger Fry had termed post-Impressionism—
but only in painting; the word was only later applied to German painting
even, and not till very much later to German architecture, in spite of the
fact that the tendency to which it was applied had been noticed as early as
1907,

What alarmed Muthesius about these Individualistic essays was that they
deviated from his concept of the typical, for he goes on immediately to say

More than any other art, architecture strives taward the typical. Only in this
can it find fulfilment. Only i in the all-embracing and continuous pursuit of this
aim can it regain that effectiveness and undoubted assurance that we admire in
the works of past times that marched along the road of homogeneity. And only
that way might it meet painting and sculpture of equal quality . . . in those
ames the feeling for the rhythmic and the architectonic was universally alive
and governed all the works of man, whereas in more recent times, architecture

* Ernst and his opinions are also extensively discussed in Bitheil's book, pp.
282-5.

—talled by Semper ‘the lawgiver and awpport that no art dare lack'—has
heen dragged along in the wake of its sister arts.

and in saying this he formulated a group of related ideas that became a kind
of unspoken prejudice that underlies a great part of subsequent architec-
tural thought: that under the leadership of architecture, all the arts of
design ought to evolve towards the establishment of standards (types,
norms) of a homogeneous style—a prejudice that was translated into visible
fact for a few years at the Bauhaus in the Twenties,

But homogeneity and the typical have more than aesthetic connotations
for Muthesius. Fer him the overtones of these words extend as deep into
sociology and history as do those of zechigue in the hands of Auguste
Choisy.

Thus, the re-establishment of an architectonic culture is a basic condition of all

the arts... . It is a question of bringing back into our way of life that order and

discipline of which good Form is the outward manifestation.

In modern social and economic organisation there is 2 sharp tendency to con-

formity under dominant viewpoints, a strict uniformity of individual elements,

a depreciation af the inessential in favour of immediate essentials. And these

social and economic tendencies have a spiritual affinity with the formal tenden-
cies af our aesthetic movement.

And here he has laid the foundation of another prejudice: that certain for-
mal usages are proper to certain conditions of society. This is implicit
still in his next paragraph, but his main theme is now a return to the idea
of a German destiny in design,
Germany enjoys a reputation for the most strict and exact organisation in her
businesses, heavy industry and state institutions of any country in the world—
our military discipline may be cited as the ground of this. Such being the case,
perhaps this is an expression of Germany's vecation—to resolve the great prob-
fem of architectonic form, Well as our great economic trusts may appreciate
the architectonic tendencies of our time, circumstances make us ask whether
we can still rely directly on firma and unions of this kind alone to support the
progress of architecture. For it to succeed, the whole class of educated Germans,
and above all our wealthier private individuals, must be convinced of the need
for pure Form, in order that it may progress farther in our land,
If this sounds uncomfortably like a nineteenth-century politician trying to
enlist liberal support for some military enterprise, rallying the intellectuals
behind the professional soldiers, then it is because that is broadly how
Muthesius did regard the situation, The new insistence on spiritualisation
and good Form was, in part at least, only another tactic in a continuing
trade war in which aesthetics were still a competitive margin. Le Corbuster
later accused Behrens of having designed buildings to further Prussian
propaganda, citing, e.g. the AEG factories, and there is certainly a nation-
alist tone about the closing lines of the speech that reminds us that the
Werkbund was seen by Muthesius as an. adjunct of state policy.

Onty when every member of our nation instinctively clothes his needs in the
best Form, shall we achieve a3 s race a level of taste worthy of the former pro-

gressive efforts of Germany. This development of taste, the enjoyment of the
handling of Form, hoid « decisive meaning for the future status of Germany
in the world. First we must set our own house in order, and when all is clarity
and light within, we can begin to have some effect outside. Only then shall we

appear in the world as a nation worthy to be entrusted, among other things,
with the handling of this task—to restore to the world and our age the Jost
benefits of an architectonic culeure.

Just as those who owed most to the Futurists started off, as it were, by
discounting Marinetti’s patriotic intentions, so those who owed most to
Muthesius soon put the Prussianism to one side, but—-French and Ger-
man alike—they did tend to retain the authoritarian tone that accompanied
his theory of types and uniformity. Their intention is to legislate for,
rather than serve, their public. But as far as the Werkbund Congress of
IGII was concerned, the patriotic issue was not the one they wanted to dis-
cuss. It was Form, and Type, that dominated the early part of the debate
on his paper.

Comelius Gurlitt, in the first speech from the floor, made it clear that
the intention to change policy was understood

The question of quality alone can no longer be decisive, but the word Form
deserves to be set alongside it in the spearhead af our effort

and the Muthesian consequence as well

So, then, another important question arises; the question: Type or Individu-
ality?
but in spite of his standing as a serious historian of art and architecture he
was not prepared to treat this question with quite the earnestness that
Muthesius intended.

That question—when you come to Hellerau—you will find, not solved, but
under examination, and that in many witty and interesting ways, There you can
see, in the houses and in the house planning, individual creations cheek-by-
jowl with types—the former after the taste of the designers, the Latter after that
of the people who live in them. . .

The question of the typical was not completely new—not in Werkstatte
circles anyhow, since Bruno Paul’s designs for mass-production furniture
of the previous year had been termed T'ypenmdbel—and the second contri-
bution from the floor has the smooth look of a prepared response. K. E.
Osthaus of the Folkwang Museum in Hagen,® used an argument that was
to be repeated ad nauseam for the next forty years as he brought the eigh-
teenth century forward as an historical justification for standardisation and
the typical

I have come straight here from France, where I found ta my surprise a whole

series of towns all developed on the same aesthetic pattern. ] might take Rennes

* Osthaus was one of the ‘culture heroes’ of the period (ta misuse a useful phrase)
and was active in commissioning work from progressive designers such as Behrena,
van de Velde, Grapius and Bruno Taut.

as an example, where the town was completely gutted in the eighteenth century,
and subsequently rebuilt according to an unified architectural scheme. Essenti-
ally it is a question there of a Typical plan-form that makes it almost impossible
to tel] one house from another. Yet though the town expresses a more uniform
appearance than perhaps any other in the world, men derive a most vigoreus
artistic life from it, in spite of outward uniformity. The Typical, as one sees it
fully developed there, has formed itself by the equalisation and refinement of
personal needs, Se it need not necessarily function as a atumbling block to

artistic creation.

This exposition of the virtues of eighteenth-century typicality more or less
closes the ring of the argument begun by Muthesius when he referred his
audience back to the eighteenth century for the last visible examples of
good Form, The attitudes adopted in 1911 remained good, for the most
part until] 1914 and far beyond—Henry van de Velde’s polemic against
Muthesius at the 1914 Congress still left the question in the form “Type
or Individuality’ and should be regarded, like his elegant theatre at the
Werkbund exhibition in Cologne that year, as a spirited rearguard action
by an outgoing type of designer. Beyond this it should be noted that
Muthesius’s preoccupations with problems like national standing, aes-
thetics, standardisation and mechanisation were to find partial fulfil-
ment—like those of the Futurists—in the ensumg World War. Under the
pressure of military necessity and a tight economic situation, DIN-Format
began to be applied to an increasing range of industrial products. It was
essentially the freezing, ad hoc, of a number of widely-used dimensionings
as standard measures for that particular class of product (Deutsche fndu-
strie~Normen), and 30 ‘our military discipline’ became indeed the ground of
standardisation and the Typical. DIN-Format was never fully abandoned
after the war, and was revived and revised in the Second World War. It is
commonly taken to be the inspiration ef Bauhaus studies in dimensional
standardisation of building components, and thus lies at the root of the
whole trend toward modular co-ordination that runs right through the
Modern Movement.


6: The factory aesthetic

THE FAGUSWERKE AT Aifeld, designed from 1911 onwards by Gropius and
Meyer, and in construction until 1914, is frequently taken to be the first
building of the Modern Movement properly so-called, the end of the
pioneer phase in Modern architecture. Vhere can be little doubt that it
owes this high esteem in part to Gropius’s personal relationship to the
historians of the Modern Mevement, and also, m part, to the accidents of
photography—it is possible, by a hostile selection of photographs,’ te make
it appear no more ‘Modern’ than, say, Behrens’s Eppenhausen develop-
ment of 1907. The modernity of this group of buildings ts visible, indeed,
only on parts of two sides, where the machine-shop and power-house pre-
sent glazed walls to the south, These two blocks are in such strong contrast
to the unadventurous neo-Classical regularity of the rest of the buildings
that one may suspect that—like the infermal planning, and the strong
sculptural forms of the dust-extractor plant—they must have been an
unsought consequence of the imnerste W’esen of the functional programme.
The rest of the factory lies well within the scope and intentions of the cur-
rent bedy of Werkbund practice and ideas, but these plazed blocks, with
their windows rising continuously through three stories, and wrapped
round the corners of the block without corner piers, stand out as major
innovations but ray not have been designed until as late as the beginning
of 1913 when Gropius and Meyer were already working on the Werkbund
Pavilion for the 1914 Exhibition in Cologne.

But they still lacked the support of any accumulated experience in Werk-
bund circles of the aesthetics of glazed envelopes, and serious visual re-
search on this subject seems not to have been attempted until the beginning
of the Twenties. Nevertheless, if practice lagged, in theoretical writings
Muthesius ran well ahead, At an early date he had begun to assemble that
canon of nineteenth-century glass and iron masterpieces that was to be

1 Such a hestile selection, made for polemical reasons, may be found ia Bruno
Zevi's book Poetica dell’ Archtitettura Neo-Plastica (Milan, 1953).

extended by Meyer, by }. A. Lux,? by Lindner and Steinmetz, and receive
its definitive form in Giedion’s Bauen in Frankreich of 1928. Already in his
Stilarchitektur und Baukunst of 1902, Muthesius lists the Crystal Palace,
the two Hibiictheques of Labrouste, the Galerie des Machines and the
Eiffel Tower, and he comments on the ‘failure’ of the Chicago Centennial
to maintain the standard set by earlier exhibitions. To this canon of ac-
cepted masterpieces is appended a general encomium of station halls,
covered markets, glazed museum -courts and department stores, Though he
did not labour this list when he came te contribute to a symposium on
factory design in the Werkbund Jahrbuch for 1913, he did revise it

A good deal of engineering structure, bridges, station halls, lighthouses and

pram silos, are good aesthetically,
and though this list includes structures of a solidly plastic type (ighthouses,
silos) it was prefaced by Lethabitic excursion into machine design that
throws the emphasis very heavily the other way.

The contrary sense appears in the invention of the bicycle wheel with its wire
spokes and pneumatic tyre. No one nowadays any longer finds anything
abnormal in this, and the light structure of the wire spoking strikes us as fine
and elegant,

One might expect to find such sentiments echoed by the designer of
the transparencies of the Faguswerke and the Cologne pavilion, but in
so far as Gropius’s humane and intelligent reflections on factory design
show any aesthetic preferences, they go against the grain of Muthesius’s
ideas
Compared to other European countries, Germany has a clear lead in the aes-
thetics of factory-building. But in the motherland of industry, in America, there
exist great factory buildings whose majesty outdoes even the best Genman work
of this order. The grain silos of Canada and South America, the coal bunkere
of the leading railroads and the newest work halls of the North American indus-

trial trusts, can bear comparison, in their overwhelming monumental power,
with the buildings of ancient Egypt.

and he continues the monumental theme when he praises Behrens’s
buildings for AEG as Denkmdler von Adel und Kraft. This clearly is not the
quality that Muthesius found admirable when he singled out the Eiffel
Tower, or station halls, or bicycle wheels for praise, and Muthesius’s
theoretical position stood far ahead of any support from the practical
men.

Such support as he did receive came, not from the Zweck-Kunst Classi-
cists who otherwise stood nearest to him, but from the ‘Expressionists’ of
the Breslau group, and from a surviver of Art Nouveau. The latter was

4 Meyer's book Eisendauten (Berlin, 1908) was to exercise considerable influence
in an underground way; it was little read by architects, as far as one can make out,
but much used by historians. The effect of Lux’s Ingenieuraesthetik (Berlin, 1913}
seem to have been mach lesa.

a — - o  —  o


August Endell, whose grandstand for the Mariendorf race-track, Bertin, a
work of 1910 may be regarded as a jate, self-conscious, but perfectly
controlled survival of nineteenth-century lattice-structure sensibility, en-
riched by the experiments in three-dimensional arabesque which had char-
acterised some sections of continental Art Nouveau (e.g., Horta, house
in Rue Paul-Emile Jansen). It is a rare and early approximation to a true
space-frame structure,’

The Breslau group had the advantage of an exhibition to create an
opportunity to exercise their talents, and two small exhibition buildings by
Bruno Taut should be discussed first, before turning to the buildings for
the Breslau Jahrhundertfeier, These two buildings were both pavilions for
industrial marketing combines: one for the Stahktwerksverband (Leipzig,
1913) the other for the Glass Industry, at the Cologne Exhibition of 1914.
The former is the Jess interesting, consisting of a glazed stepped-back
pyramid of steel post-and-lintel construction on an octagonal base, but
surmounted by a large sphere, whose diameter fills the highest octagon, and
is seen through the structure immediately below. The glass pavilion is of
much greater originality, the greater part of its volume being enclosed by a
tall dome of approximately geodesic structure, with steel ribs and giazed
panels. This stands on a regular, sixteen-sided lawer storey, in which stairs
with glass treads and risers ascend in curves between walls of glazed bricks.
Both structurally and visually this is the most brilliant combination of glass
and steel achieved by any architect in the years immediately preceding
1914. Quite apart from the possibility of its having been influenced by
Paul Scheerbart’s book Gilasarchttfekiur’ which came out in the same year,
its rare qualities suggest that it was produced in a moment of genius that
Taut was unable to repeat. The same must be said of Max Berg’s Fahrhun-
derthaile at Breslau {1913}. No other work of Berg's long career, both as
city architect of Breslau, or as an independent designer, is to be compared to
this giant dome, and like Taut’s glass dome, this structure in reinforced
concrete must rank as the most brilliant use of its materials achieved by
anybody in its period (with the possible exception of some of Freyssinet’s
early vaults). By comparison with the sense of plasticity and three-dimen-
sional form, the understanding of concrete as a material to be poured and
moulded, that performs most efficiently in arcuate and vaulted forms, such
az Berg exhibits here, the contemporary work of Perret cannot but appear
wooden and intellectually circumscribed. Here, alone, in Germany or
elsewhere, was a building that could face comparison with Muthesius’s
canon of nineteenth-century exhibition buildings in terms of scale, origin-
ality and exploitation of the material. The way in which it was forgotten and
its lessons ignored (much as the lessons of Freyssinet’s hangars were

* Endell, hke Muthesius, was an admirer of such structures as glazed station
ls

‘ See chapter ro.
r Q, EM.A.

ignored, even while lip-service was paid to their designer) in the T'wenties,
is a mark of the success with which an aesthetic could be applied in defiance
of the best use of the material, even by architects who accepted truth to
materials as a fundamental tenet in their philosophy of design, and is a
tribute also to the power of conviction carried by the Abstract aesthetics of
immediately post-War art movements.

The other main buildings for the Fahrhundertfeter were the work of Hans
Poelzig. They do not show him at his best or his most inventive, their
detailing is in a kind of smudged Greek Doric and the planning is aca-
demic. But outside such ‘representational’ contexts Poelzig was one of the
most consistently and persuasively inventive designers of his generation in
Germany. His buildings for industry really did produce new forms for new
needs, were the chief ornament of the Expressionist, or Individualist wing
in the Werkbund, and were the prime inspiration of the short-lived Ex-
pressionist phase in German architecture after 1918.

The chemical plant at Luban, near Berlin, is the best-known of the
buildings of this phase of his work; its mannered distribution of Roman
windows over otherwise unmodulated facades has attracted criticism, but
it was effected with conviction, and appears to bear a functional relation to
the innerste Wesen of the building's use. Jt is a work of the same year as the
Fapuswerke, but completed more quickly, and it has none of that building’s
inconsistencies or uncertainties. ‘lhe effect of the whole is homogeneous
and deliberate, even if it bears little superficial resembiance to later
Modern buildings. As an exercise m unadorned, but carefully modulated,
brick structure, this work of Poelzig’s does not stand entirely alone, for a
similar aesthetic, though more austerely handled, can be seen in Stoff-
regen’s factory for the Anker Linoleum Company, a work of 1912 whose
reputation survived the War but subsequently fell from regard. In the
same way, the sculptural treatment of the exterior of Poelzig’s water-tower
at Posen, designed in 1910, finds an echo in the boldly formed roof of
Albert Marx’s boiler-house at Had Nauheim, which like the Anker
Company, was also a work of 1912. In fact, one can see building up
around Poelzig and Berg in the last four years before the war an incipient
school of factory designers,* independently descended from the English
Free architecture, almost unaffected by the Classicising preferences of the
Behrens wing in the Werkbund, eschewing decoration and handiing
sculptural forms with great boldness—a beldness to be matched only in
Futurist projects at that time, Immediately after the War it looked as if
this schoo! could resume where it had broken off, and in a generally expres-
sionist atmosphere that affected even Gropius and Mies van der Rohe,
the early works of Erich Mendelsohn and Huge Haring promised a real

# Designers of this persuasion in the Werkbund were well-represented in the
Fakréuch for 1913.

continuance.* But the movement was quickly inhibited by the Dutch
and Russian Abstract aesthetics mentioned above, and came to nothing,

The comparison with the Futurists may be taken a little further than out-
ward formal similarities, though, as some of Poeizig’s immediately pre-
War projects show, these were remarkably close—there is one sketch for a
factory store that could serve equally well as a prototype of the drying shed
of Mendelsohn’s Luckenwalde factory, or of some of Sant’ Elia’s Dinamisma
Archiiettonica sketches. But it is clear beyond this, that Poelzig had some-
thing of the Futurists’ mechanical sensibility, even as early as 1910, at
which time it is doubtful if he could have read any of the manifestoes,
The interior of the water-tower at Posen, with its emphasis on mech-
anical equipment and metallic structure, reveals, beyond the mere fulfil-
ment of operating needs, a sense of the dramatic possibilities inherent
in these factors, and the creation of forms and spaces that emphasise
them.

Compared with the work done on this wing of the Werkbund’s creative
programme, that achieved on the other side, by Behrens, Gropius and
Muthesius himself must appear less adventurous and imaginative. ‘The
development of Behrens’s great work-halls fer AEG does show a consistent
growth, away from the massive pseudo-Classicism of the Turbinenfabrik of
1g08—9, where the management of the massively rusticated and battered
comers seems to make nonsense of the frame-and-fill and glass-and-stcel
structure of the sides, to the Grossmaschinenfabrik of 1911-12, where he
seems at last to sense that glazed or solid, the wails and roof are only a
light envelope drawn over a vast bulk of industrially usable space. Even the
brick panels between the windows of the sides seem to have a light and
tenuous quality that is quite unlike the solid walling of any of his earlier
industrial work, On the other hand, this block also has a rather cheap and
unfinished air, as if restrictions on budget had played a larger part in its
design than in, say, the Turdinenfabrik, which was clearly intended as a
piece of prestige building. But whatever alternative influences may have
been at work, he remains faithful te a standard envelope for all these
factory halls—the envelope of a Classical temple, qualified only by an
industrial necessity (viz. the need to give head-clearance ta gantry runs)
that militated against plain single-ridged roofs, and accounts for his poly-
gonal gable-forms, The only important exception to this type of gable
occurs on the Hochspannungsfabrik, 1g10, where paired Classical pediments
appear low down on the main facade to express the presence of a pair of

*Mendelsohn’a factory at Luckenwalde, and Haring's farm buildings at Gut
u, promised, in the very first years of the Twenties, an architecture extra-
ordinarily open-minded in its attitude to materials and planning—the use of wood
on exteriors of holdly sculptural form and the employment of exposed concrete
portal frames in the interiors of these two schemea, coupled with the most remark-
tble horseshoe plan of Gut Garkau, all suggest a mode of design that could have
greatly enriched the architecture of the Twenties,

parallel work-halls within the building, though these halls do not appear
functionally to penetrate to the outer wall at this point.

Curiously, these more enterprising designs of Behrens left less mark on
subsequent architectural thought and feeling than did the Turbinenfabrik,
which seems to have served as a model even for post-War Expressionist
architecture, But it is clear, anyhow, that the long-term significance of
Behrens’s pre-War industrial architecture does not lie altogether in the
buildings themselves—except in so far as they demonstrated his ability to
clothe industrial needs in forms that would be recognised by his contem-
poraries as ‘architectural’ in almost the normal sense of the word, Here
Behrens is most closely to be compared with Auguste Perret, the fatter
having brought a new material—concrete—within the accepted canons of
architectural thought,’ just as Behrens brought a new set of functional
programmes within the accepted formal disciplines, and of this last the
Turbinenfabrik was the most exemplary demonstration. It is also another
demonstration of the exemplary way in which Behrens embodied Muthe-
siua's ideal of the good designer. Coming from painting, by way of graphic
design and Gewerbekunst, to domestic architecture and thence to industrial
design in the very broadest sense, he liberated himself from the influence
of Art Nouveau and achieved, in the Turbinenfadrik, that kind of Schinkel-
esque form that Muthesius was to demand in so many words of the Werk-
bund designers two years later.

Yet his Schinkelism was by no means consistent. In 1g11, at the same
time as the extremely neo-Classical Wiegand house in Dahlem, his office
also produced the gasworks buildings in Frankfurt, perhaps the most for-
mally inventive industrial buildings of his pre-War career. It may be
because of some such indecision in his own mind, or within his office hier-
archy, that he did not exercise an equal, or equally beneficial, neo-Classical
influence on his pupil-assistants. Mies van der Rohe clearly accepted it,
and—to judge from his project for the Kréller House—could practise it
with even greater facility than his master, Le Corbusier rejected it, in
practice, and in written word, Gropius, it seems, accepted it, but without
benefit to his architecture.

There may have been some fundamental disposition of Gropius'’s mind
that accounts for the seeming division of intentions here, His training, at
the Charlottenburg Hochschule and in Munich was one that, on other per-
sonalities (Poelzig, Berg, Mendelsohn} produced designers of an Expres-
sionist turn of mind, and the blank, plain, glyptic shapes of his early houses
at Jankow in Prussia (1906) suggest, within a neo-Classical envelope, a
sculptural attitude to design that might be compared to Poelzig’s. ‘The
solidly walled storehouse block of the Faguswerke seems ta continue this
tendency, while the tight functional programme prevented any neo-Clas-
sical idea, acquired from Behrens in the intervening years, from appearing

?t See chapter +4.

“a

in the plan. But in the offices and ‘Fabrik’ for the Werkbund at their
Exhibition in Cologne in 1914, the enforced discipline of an industrial pro-

e did not exist, Gropius and Meyer were at liberty to arrange the
elements of the building as they thought fit. A comparison of the finished
building with the block plan shown in the Jahrbuch for 1913 reveals an
extensive rearrangement of the parts, probably connected with a change
in the function of half the building—that part which was labelled Weré-
stdtie on the 1913 plan becoming a hail for the display of machine tools,
etc, with an additional pavilion for the Deutz motor-company.

The plan finally used is fully as academic as that employed by Poelzig
in his buildings for the Breslau fohrhundertfeier but with the addition of
certain usages that seem uncommonly French. The office block is disposed
axially about the main entrance, and the axis runs back through an open
courtyard and down the centre of the Machine Hall. The courtyard is
traversed by an axe secondafre, and—on paper, though not as seen by
the eye in fact—has bi-axial symmetry, the linking passages between the
open sheds that flanked the court and the office on the one hand, the
Machine Hall on the other, being disposed in such a way as to create
identical patterns of set-backs on both sides, even though the two con-
fronted elevations were utterly different, As can sometimes be seen on
more ‘experimental’ types of Beaux-Arts plans, there is an asymmetrical
element, the Deutz Pavilion, aligned on a tertiary axis at the other end of the
machine hail.

Stylistically, the various elements of this group of buildings are a fairly
complete florilegium of the modern eclectic sources from which an up-to-
date Werkbund designer could draw at the time. That which seems most
homogeneous with the aims of the Werkbund and its expressed attitudes is
the Machine Hail, clearly based on gable-ended train-sheds such as
Muthestus had admired, simple in form and entirely convincing in its
shape, a8 are the open sheds that flank the court, though these have every
appearance of being at least the prototypes of standard units drawn from
industrial production. An equal certainty of design, though a far less adven-
turous form, is exhibited by the Deutz Pavilion. Clearly related in its de-
tails, plan-form and constructional methods to Taut’s Stekiwerksverband
Pavilion of the previous year, it makes a strong contrast with Taut’s Glass
Industry exhibit of 1914. Where this latter steps forward to further struc-
tural and formal adventure with its geodesic dome and so forth, the Gropius
version is a step back towards an accepted Classicising form, that of the
Tholos or polygonal temple—a point which is emphasised by the copy of
the Parthenon Hermes that was placed at its base at the end of the jong
pool which ran down the side of the Machine Hall.

But the office block is the most complex part of the whole assembly,
stylistically speaking, and also architecturally the weakest, Its overall
silhouette can only be described as Palladian, in the manner of Wilton

House, with 2 long two-sterey central body, a weakly-marked central
entrance, and terminal towers—or nearly so; the position of these towers is
architecturally the most debatable part of the design. The source of the
silhouette is Wrightian as are some of the details (e.g. the framing of the
entrance) and this is the first clear demonstration of Wright’s influence in
Werkbund circles. Wright’s work was fairly well known by 1913-14, not
only through the Wasmuth publications but also through the activities of
Hi. P. Berlage. There is a striking similarity between the block form of
Gropius’s building and Wright's bank in Mason City, Iowa, completed a
year earlier, particularly as to the flanking towers and their deeply overhung
cornices. Drawings for this building, published in the first Wasmuth
volume, are also the source for the use of a close-spaced rhythm of brick
piers with narrow slit-like windows between them, and for much of the
detailing of the brickwork throughout the whole block.

Had Gropius and Meyer been content to follow out this Wrightian exer-
cise to its natural formal conclusion, the result would have been, it seems, a
distinguished pioneering work in an idiom new to Europe, though clearly
sympathetic to neo-Classic modes of thought. However, their neo-Classical
disposition of mind seems to have been insufficiently strong to resist the
temptation to make the building a manifesto of Muthesian transparency
and fine-structure at the same time. On the courtyard face, the Wrightian
basement storey and the Wrightian roof-structures, are separated by a
storey of total glazing, carried some three feet clear of the rear structural
wall of the block, making a covered passage that links the various first-floor
offices with the staircases at the end of the block. These staircases are not
as might be imagined, within the towers, but stood proud im front of them
on the other facade, in semicircular projections in the manner of the end
pavilion of Hoffmann’s Villa Ast (Vienna, 1909). But whereas Hoffmann
had used a solidly-walled form with two cornices to emphasise its shape,
Gropius and Meyer continue their total glazing round the ends of the
building at first-floor level and wrap it around the staircases, at which point
itis brought down to ground-level, to produce glazed half-drums rising the
full height of the main facade. The staircases are thus visible from outside,
as is the corner stair of the Faguswerke, and this technical innovation has
enjoyed a considerable succes d’éstime ever since, as well as providing the
inspiration for some of Mendelsohn’s most characteristic designs. But it is
difficult to rate it a visual success. The two turns of staircase that are re-
vealed rise at different rates, due to the presence of a haif-landing in the
upper one, an uncomfortable sight that would have been better hidden,
while the glazing of the whole end of the building at first-floor level, re-
veals the fact that the towers, instead of being firmly based on a continuous
structure down to ground level—as they are in the Wrightian prototype—
are haif-heartedly cantilevered from the internal structure at the level of
the main roof.

‘The cantilevers are slight, but in this context most unhappy. The whole
building seems to lack any experienced awareness (such as Paul Scheerbart
already possessed) of the difficulties of glass walling from the visual! angle.
The simple strongly-marked rhythm of the vertical ordering of the
Faguswerke windows is replaced by an uncentrolied horizontal spread with-
out, however, the appearance of being intended for what would later have
been called an ‘endless’ facade, and the effect of transparency seems not to
have been studied. Compared to van de Velde’s Theatre at the same exhi-
bition, this must appear a more clumsy piece of design. But van de Velde’s
building, though immensely sophisticated, 1s without innovations, archi-
tecturally speaking. The future lay with Gropius and those who felt as he
did. All they lacked was an aesthetic discipline that would make sense of
transparencies, cantilevers, glass-walling and other technical innovations.

That aesthetic discipline was not, however, one that any schooi of archi-
tecture scerns to have been capable of finding for itself, and the resolution
of the architectural difficulties was to come from the realm of painting and
sculpture, from that development towards purely Abstract art that had
already been launched by the Cubists and Futurists, but did not become
available as a usable discipline until after the War.

7: Adolf Loos and the prablem of ornament

AMONG THE EFFECTIVE contributors to the body of ideas that supported
the Modern Movement, one must certainly number Adolf Loos. Yet his
contribution was sporadic, personal and not always very serious in tone.
As an architect he appears as one of the first ta build in a manner that really
valued simphcity of form as a virtue in itself, yet usually spoiled that
simplicity by usages that wilfully departed from it, or materials that con-
cealed it, As a writer he was prolific and usually well-informed, yet much of
his influence depends upon one, or possibly two, of his most opinionated
essays, As a person he was turbulent, combative, contradictory and capable
of turning personal quarrels into public crusades, yet he was admired and
courted, and people are still proud to claim his acquaintance,! twenty or
more years after his death.

His active career divides itself into three main parts. The first, down te
his return from the U.S.A. in 1897 does not concern us immediately at this
point. The second, of active building, teaching and journalism in Vienna,
reaching a peak of productivity around 1910, produced his must influential
writings, his most characteristic buildings, The third, which begins with his
arrival in Paris in 1923 a8 an acknowledged celebrity, is the phase of his
greatest personal influence, but one that is hardest to deal with historically
—one has to accept the testimony of those who knew him then that they
were pleased when they pleased him,? and were flattered to be accepted into
his circle of friends and admirers.

But this third phase was the preduct of the second. His celebrity on
arrival depended only in part on his personal reputation, and hardly at all

* Many architects came, or claim to have come, under his influence either in
Vienna or Parnis—most notably André Lurgat, Richard Neutra, Reymond Schindler
and Eric Mendelsohn.

4 Lurcat, in conversation with the author, volunteered the information that one
of his early designs faisatt grand plaisir a Adolf Loos, Somewhere in this connection,
by way of Loos's notorious Anglomania, may lie the explanation of what appear to
be quotations from the work of Charles Rennie Mackintosh that appear in Parisian
architecture in the early Twenties—the tall ‘oriel’ window of Lurgat’s Maison
Guggenbuhl ia a case obviously in point.

on his buildings, which seem to have been known only by hearsay. He was
famous primarily for certain of his writings which had just been reprinted
for the second time in French, writings from the peak years of the second
phase, writings which he himself regarded as the most essential expressions
of his credo. Like practically everything else he wrote, these had appeared
first in Viennese newspapers and periodicals, and were mostly occasional
works—as a witty and spritely controversialist he was im demand for
feuilletons and exhibition notices, and he wrote on a wide variety of sub-
jects, such as clothing, manners, furnishing, music, etc. besides architec-
ture. These writings all exhibit a similar tendency, anti-Romantic, fas-
tidious, puritanical (though never inhumane) and authoritarian (though
opposed to established authorities). The possible appeal of these qualities
to later Modern Movement theorists is clear, but they might well have been
forgotten and lost in post-War Vienna, but for the activities of one man
whose connection with Modern architecture is important, though oblique.

This was Herwarth Walden, proprietor of a gallery and magazine, both
called Der Sturm, who was one of the chief representatives of revolu-
tionary art, and primarily Expressionism, in Berlin. A conscientious avant-
pardiste, and despiser of conventions, on the model of Marinetti, he made
his magazine, founded in 1910, and gallery, which ran until 1924, a clear-
ing-house of ideas on an international scale, somewhat Lke Léonce Rosen-
berg in Paris after 1919. He was one of those who introduced Futurism
to the German public, in 1912; and also in 1912 he published in his maga-
zine five of Loos’s essays.’ These may have been brought to his attention
by Arnold Schoenberg, who was a friend of Loos, and also in touch with
German Expressionist painters (he was a member of the Munich Plane
Reiter group) at all events, the tone of voice of the essays that appeared in
Der Sturm was of a kmd to appeal to despisers of convention, even if the
logical outcome of their arguments was not. In particular the tone of
Ornament und Verbrechen, which Loos had written in 1908, was likely to
appeal by its use of sexual and anthropological arguments, and that of
Architektur, by its apotheosis of peasant design.

Access to the pages of Der Stuzm was access to a limited, but international
audience, and bore fruit in an almost immediate reprinting in Paris, in the
pages of Les Caluers d' Aujour® hui m 1913, in what became the standard
French translation, by Georges Besson. The Besson version is lively, but
somewhat bowdlerised, and fairly heavily cut, as far as Ornament und
Verbrechen is concerned, drastically cut and shortened in the case of
Architektur, Nevertheless, the main substance of the argument is present
in both cases, and these two essays (all that ever were translated} would
appeal to similar persons and frames of mind in Paris as in Berlin—in
this case, those who later became members of Dadz. For when Ornament

"A bibliography of these reprintings is given in Schreyer and Walden, Der
Sturm (Baden-Baden, 1954).

und Verbrechen was reprinted again in French, in 1920 in L’Esprit Nouveau
~—perhaps its most influential reprinting, and the one that prepared the way
for Loos’s arrival in Paris—it was during the period when Paul Dermée, an
active fringe Dadaist who did much to break up the attempt to revive La
Section d'Or, was still one of L'Esprit Nowveau’s editors, It thus carried a
double sense; it supported the demand of Le Corbusier for a reform in
architecture and an abandonment of the catalogue styles, and it also sup-
ported the Dadaists’ campaign of mockery against the fine arts, thus gaining
Loos the entrée to the circle of Tristan Tzara and other Dadaists,

L'Esprit Nouveau also promised the forthcoming publication of Archi-
tektur (under the title of L’ Architecture Moderne) but this never took place
and the essay finally appeared again in French in Morancé’s L’ Architecture
Vivante, in 1923. Between these twa second reprints of his essays in France,
Loos had gathered together his papers of the 1897-1900 period and pub-
lished therm in 1921 as Ins Leere pesprochen, a publication that bears strong
witness to his international reputation at that time—a German language
text appearing over a French imprint (that of Crés et Cie, Le Corbusier's
publishers). Ornament und Verbrechen, and Architektur achieved their
second German reprintings in a further book of collected essays, Trofzden,
which appeared in Innsbruck in 1930,

Also in Austria appeared a Festschrift for his sixtieth birthday (1930) and
Kulka’s study of his work as an architect (1931). This return to a purely
Austrian status should be noted, for it is clear that at the beginning of the
Thirties Loos was not the commanding figure that he had been at the
beginning of the Twenties, and Tretzdem does not appear to be so widely
known and cited as Ins Leere gesprocken—ain fact, architects who have read
the latter are sometimes unaware of the existence of Tretzdem, even though
they know Ornament und Verbrechen.* The reasons for this fall from grace
are probably to be sought in the difference of generation between Loos and
the practising masters of the New architecture, and far a drastic change in
sensibility during the Twenties {occasioned largely by the diffusion of
Abstract and Futurist ideas, that made Loos look old-fashioned) and in the
probability of personal quarrels with (e.g.) Le Corbusier. At all events,
Loos’s main impact on his younger contemporaries was made via Paris in
the early Twenties, and—beyond his personal influence—appears to de-
pend primarily upon Jns Leere gesprochen and Ornament und Verbrechen.
The former acted as a support to Corbusian ideas of architecture as equip-
ment but Ornament und Verbrechen, because it exercised influence of some
sort from the time of its first writing, and because it was very clearly a pro-
duct of a particular time and place, will be dealt with here.

The subject of this essay—the status of architectural decoration—was

“In spite of his personal acquaintance with Looa in the Twenties, Lurgat, for
instance, seemed to know Ornament und Verbrechen only from the reprint of it in
DEsprit Nouveau.

not a new one, and in the early years of the century was a very live issue.
But Loos’s attitude towards the subject goes far beyond that of any of his
contemporaries, and directly contradicts that of some of the most influen-
tial bodies of opinion, notably the Werkbund. It will be helpful, therefore,
to survey the state of opinion briefly around 1g1o, The attitude of the
Rationalists, and of the Academics, was effectively one of indifference.
T. G. Jackson makes a familiar gibe when he observed

The man who cannot design fies naturally to omament

but he seems not to have actually envisaged an entirely undecorated archi-
tecture, any more than Guadet did, in spite of his indifference to style.
Similarly Geoffrey Scott regards ornament as unimportant if the basic con-
trol of form is sufficiently sure

These means sufficed them {i1.c. Renaissance architects). Given these they could
dispense at will with sculpture and colour

a view which is flatly contradicted by Choisy’s
The Renaissance in Italy involved only a reform im the systern of ornament

and although Choisy does once express a preference for a building because
it is free from ornament; he is not, in general, hostile to it. Among the
English Free architects one finds contempt for the catalogued styles, but no
hesitation 19 using ornament of their own invention, and an exploitation
(though less vigorous than in the case of Loos) of the inherent decorative
qualities of natural materials. Voysey is on record as objecting to orna-
mental plaster-work on ceilings, but only because he cricked his neck in
looking at it, and one cannot but notice how Voysey turns minor functional
necessities (such as the owl-ports in some of his gables) to decorative profit.

But what is most remarkable, in view of later developments, is to find
within the line of descent from the English Free architecture and the
Deutscher Werkbund, no sense of impropriety in the ornamentation of
machinery, engineering structures and machine products. The develop-
ment of such a sense is a tribute to the revolution in taste effected by Loos
himself and the Abstract aesthetics of the war years. Before this revolution
it is possible to find an anonymous Lethabist in the Architectural Review
observing that there is

. + a firestation just outside of Vauxhall where the lockout stage is a simple
Piece of iron lattice work wonderfully agreeable in its lines. Add to a skeleton
like this a little bit of daintily designed and disposed modelling and the result
would be charming,

More remarkable than this is the Werkbund’s only official pronunciation
on the subject in the period, an article by Karl Gross in the Jahrbuch for

'Saint Front in Perigueux, more imposing in its severe nakedness than San
Marco ... with all its mosaics and marbles,’ Choisy's observaticns on Doric quoted
in chapter 2, go some way in this direction as well,

igiz. It is easy to suppose that Muthesius’s demands for the elimination
of the nebenstichlich refers to ornament specifically, but an examination of
Werkbund products suggests that it only refers to ‘superftuous’ ornament,
which is not the same thing. It is unlikely that Muthestus would have
been able to hold together his heterogeneous organisation if he had de-
prived one whole wing of it—the artist-designers—of the only element they
were trained in or capable of contributing, and he nowhere inveighs
against ornament as such. Behrens likewise shows a divided attitude on the
subject—his products for industrial users (e.g. arc lamps) are undecorated,
but those for domestic use (e.g. electric ovens} are ornate, and Groprus
shows himself a capable ornamentalist in his fabric designs, etc. of 1913-14.

But Karl Gross's article also reveals a qualifying factor in Werkbund
discussions that may be no more than a verbal quibble, or may be the
touchstone that distinguishes justifiable ornament from superfluous orna-
ment. It first appears as a question that can hardly be rendered into
English

Muss Schmuck denn chne weiteres Ornament sein?

because no two English words (e.g. Decoration/Omament) carry the dis-
tinction that Gross makes between Scfvnuck and Ornament. The general
sense of Sc/unuck appears clearly enough in a later sentence

Der erste Schmuck eines Gebdudes ist eine gute Massenverteitung
(The pnme ornament of a building is a good arrangement of the masses}

which seems to be comparable to the implication of a passage from Lam-
precht cited by Worringer

.. architecture, apart from its more or Jess ornamental accessories, such as
the comprehension of space... .

But, in any case, this is only the erste Schmuck, and he nowhere renders
precise the point at which the degrees of Schmuck begin to shade off
towards Ornament. And beyond this, though he is clearly dissatisfied with
some contemporary ornament {in his second sense), he does not turn his
back on it in general. In fact he looks forward to an Ornamtentzk of the
twentieth century. His views about this suggest that, though that ornament
may be in a new style, his main interest in it is one that had been declared
outmoded at the Werkbund Congress of 1911. Thus, while he admits that

Beauty of form is pleasing, even without ornament
and complains that industrial style consists of

seeking to mislead, by meana of worthless ornamental rubbish covering poorly-
conceived form
his solution dees not envisage those formal and intellectual disciplines pro-
posed by Muthesius, nor the absolute anathema proposed already by Loos,
but simply a call for Qualtat

—— —

Decoration, even ommament in the technical sense, must remain quality work
when we set out on the road to pwentieth-century ornament,

If omament is to be again what it once was and must remain, a particular dis-
tinction that lifts an object out of the general mass, it must be quality work,
The power of survival of the artistic handicrafts rests directly on this premise.

Here we have a writer belonging to the most progressive body in the field
of design at the time, taking a line that was to be specifically rejected by the
next generation of designers belonging to that bedy, who turned against
ornament of any kind, and accepted Loos’s views on the subject so whole-
heartedly that he had to complain of plagiarism. For him, the idea of a
nineteenth-century Ornamentik, was insupportable, let alone an Orna-
menith of the twentieth century, and for him ornament was irretrievably
connected with poor-quality goods.

The reason why Loas’s ideas prevailed over a more cautious attitude lies
largely in three factors. Firstly, his absolute anathema on ornament solved
Gross’s problem {and everyone else’s) by a swift and surgical means.
Secondly, he was timely and specific. At a time when Art Nouveau was
falling into discredit, his attack on ornament was launched against named
Art Nouveau designers, as weil as more generally. And thirdly, his mode of
expression gave his argument unwonted force. Both argument and style
are effectively summed up in the opening paragraphs of Ornament and
Crime,

The human embryo goes through the whole history of animal evolution in its
mother’s womb, and a newborn child has the sensory impressions of a puppy.
His childhood takes him through the stages of human progress; at the age of
two he is a Papuan savage, at four he haa caught up with the Teutonic tribes-
man. At six he is level with Socrates, and at eight with Voltsire. For at this age
he learns to distinguish violet, the colour that the eighteenth century first dis-
covered—beifore that violets were blue and tyrian was red. Physicists can al-
ready point to colours they have named, but that only later generations will be
able ta distinguish,

Children are amoral, and so—by our standards—are Papuans. If a Papuan
slaughters an enemy and eats him, that doesn’t make him a criminal. But if a
modern man kills aormeone and eats him, he must be either a crimimal or a
degenerate. The Papuana tattoo themselves, decorate their boats, their oars,
everything they can get their hands on. But a modem man who tattoces himself
is either 2 criminal or a degenerate, Why, there are prisons where eighty per cent
of the convicts are tattooed, and tattooed men who are not in prison are either
latent criminals or degenerate aristocrats. When a tattooed mar dies at liberty,
it simply means that he hasn't had time to commit hia crime.

The urge te ormament oneself and everything within reach is the ancestor of
pictorial art. It ia the baby talk of painting, All art is exotic.

The first omament born, the cross, is of erotic origin; the earliest art-work, the
first creative act of the original artist was smudged on the cave wall to let off
emotional steam—a horizontal stroke, the reclmimg woman: a vertical one, the
roan who transfixes her. The man who did this felt the same impulse as Beet-
hoven, was in the same heaven of delight as Beethoven composing the Ninth.
But the man of our own times who smudges erotic symbols an walls is either
8 criminal or a degenerate, It is clear that this vioient impulse might seize one
er two unbalanced individuals in even the most advanced cultures, but as a
general rule one can rank the cultures of different peoples by the extent to which

their lavatory walls have been drawn upon. With children this is a natural con-
dition, their frat artistic expressions are erotic scribblings on the sursery walls,
But what is natural to children and Papuan savages is a symptom of degenera-
tion in modern man,
I have therefore evalyed the follawing maxim, and prenounce it to the world:
the evolution of culture marches with the elimination of ornament from useful
objects.
Rarely—outside the Futurist Manifestoes—has a new doctrine been
enunciated in so drastic and dynamic a manner, or in a way which persuades
by chiming in with so many bodies of received opinion—albeit combined in
new patterns. Loos never made any significant extensions to the argument
set out here except the idea (not original) of ornament as wasted effort, but
almost unlimited embroideries were posstble because of the great number
of levels of reference. Many of the ideas were fairly common property. The
evolutionary fallacy may be found in Worringer for instance

Springer justly compares these productions (cave paintings) to the ‘artistic

achievements’ of African natives; another comparison not far to seek would

have been the scribblings of a child
but whereas Worringer believed these primitive scribblings to be ‘linear
abstract’ Loos, profiting from Freud (in which he is a pioneer) rates them
all symbolically representational. On the other hand, the comparison be-
tween tattooing and some kinds of architectural decoration can be found
in Lethaby as early as 1911, presumably in complete isolation from
Loosian ideas.

Above ali, there was his specific attack on named masters of Art Nouveau,
which undoubtedly helped to galvanise a hitherto vague and unorganised
distrust into a definite feeling that—at least—Art Nouveau was a past mis-
take that should not be made again,

Now that ormament is ne longer organically integrated into our culture, it has
ceased to be a valid expression of that culture. The ornament that is designed
today has ne relevance to curselves, to mankind at large, nor the ordering of
the Cosmos, It is unprogressive end uncreative,

What has happened to the ornamental work of Otto Eckmann? What has hap-
pened to van de Velde? The artist used to stand for health and strength at the
pinnacle of humanity, but the modern ornamentalist is either a cultural laggard
or a pathological case. He himself is forced to disown his work after three
years, His productions are already unbearable to cultured persons now, and will
become so to others in a little while. Where are now the works of Eckmann,
and where will those of Olbrich be ten years from now. Modern ornament has
neither farbears nor descendants, no past and no future. It may be recerved with
joy by uncultivated folk, to whom the true preatness of cur time is a book with
seven seals, but even by them it will shortiy be forgotten.

‘The specificity and personal nature of this attack have subsequently been
somewhat obscured, but they need to be re-emphasised here for reasons
that will appear later, Ornament and Crime, whatever else it may have be-
come, was originally an attack on the Wiener Sezession, and the Wiener

* Architecture, p, 188,

Werkstdtie, with whom Loos had a quarrel going back into the Nineties,
occasioned, it would appear, by Josef Hoffmann's failure to entrust him
with the decoration and furnishing of the Sezesszon council chamber, The
fact that he is only attacking contemporary ornament and contemporary
ornamentalists is brought out by the last paragraph of the essay which
ends

.,. and modern man may use the omament of historic and exotic cultures at his

discretion, but his own inventive talenta are reserved and concentrated on other

things.
Loos, in fact, is quite permissive to the ornamental activities of those
whom he regards as culturally lagging—earlier civilisations, primitive per-
sons, even the labouring poor of Vienna, It is only sophisticated decora-
tion by trained artists of his own time that he attacks, and he himself is
fully prepared to use, e.g. the Doric order, when he feels that the situation
requires it.

Also, like many reformers, he was a Traditionalist and tended to look
backward, not forward. One does not find him attacking Ruskin, as
Marinetti was to do. In spite of his inevitable distrust for the Deutscher
Werkbund (which he seems to regard as a plot of artists to batten on classes
of production that ought to be unornamented, the imposition of a false
style) he thanked Muthesius ia print for Das Enghsche Haus, and was
attached to the English cottage tradition as epitomised in the English Free
architecture. He took tradition-bound English tailoring as a model of reti-
cent good taste. Though he admired some consequences of American in-
dustry and the whole of American plumbing, he had none of the Futurists’
sense of machinery as an aid to personal expression, and he mocks the
ideas of a high-obsolescence, scrapping economy, such as was already
appearing in the U.S., and was accepted enthusiastically by the Futurists
in the next five years. He tends to see furniture and utensils as a class of
possessions whose market. value must be maintained, not as a class of
equipment te be discarded when outmoded.

A Traditionalist, he was also a Classicist, as the frequent use of Classical
details—the coffered ceiling of the American Bar in Vienna, for instance—
in his buildings shows, but one can be more specific than this; he was also
a Schinkelist. Just as the last paragraph of Ornament and Crime reveals,
unexpectedly, a permissive attitude to the ornament of the past, the con-
cluding paragraph of Architektur reveals, somewhat unexpectedly in view
of the rest of the essay, a touching faith in the value of the Schinkelschiiler
tradition

Fischer von Erlach in the south, Schliiter in the north, were justly accounted

the greatest masters of the eighteenth century. Then on the threshold of the

nineteenth century stood Schinkel—but we have forgotten him. May the

radiance of his towering achievement shine forth on the coming generations of
eur builders.

One cannot help finding this parting apotheosis of Schinkel somewhat sur-
prising, because the preceding paragraphs of Archztektur had been rather
anti-Greek in tendency. The ancient Greeks are abused for excessive
attention to original detatling and, by inference from the fact that Romans
were praised for not doing so, inventing new orders after Doric. The
Parthenon is despised for being painted—a point that later Modern-
Movement Classicists were happy to overlook. It is Rome and Roman
architecture (as he understood them) that receive Locs's approbation.
From the Romans we derive our social sense and aur spiritual discipline

It wag no accident thet the Romans were not in a position to discover new
orders of columns, new decorative styles... . The Greeks squandered their
inventiveness on the Orders, the Romans spent theirs on the plan. And he who
can tesolye the larger problems of the ground plan does not concern himself with
new mouldings,

Taking a stand on the authority of the plan, Loos brings himself clase—
closer than anywhere else—to the body of academic discipline. But it is
strange that he should praise Roman architecture here and not mention
what other German-speaking theorists found praiseworthy in it, Rewmge-
staltung, nor mention what French theorists found praiseworthy, construc-
tion, This highly abstract view of Roman building is balanced against a
curiously primitive view of the nature of architecture in general. Con-
tunuing to work backwards through the essay, we find him preceding his
praise af Rome with a demonstration of his idea that architecture must
affect the emotions, and using as an illustrative image the following

When we find a mound of earth in the woods, six feet long and three feet wide,
shovelled up inte the shape of a pyramid, then we turn serious, and a voice
inside us says ‘Here lies...’ That 1s Architecture.

Now this is not Abstract; as with the cross, the first art work smudged on
the cave wall; it is symbolic, it communicates information as well as
emotion, unlike Geoffrey Scott’s empathetic responses to architectural
form. In spite of the apparent contradiction of his insistence on the plan
in Roman architecture, it seems doubtful if, for Leos, the seeming Abstract
was ever completely so, whether the purity of Pure Form ever really
interested him as anything other than a symbol of purity of mind.

This view of Loos is reinforced by the opening paragraphs of Architektur,
which bring together several of his pet aversions and admirations, He sets
a scene on the shores of a2 mountain lake, and commends the homogeneity
of character of the scene; everything in it, mountains, water, peasant houses,
trees and clouds, all seem shaped by the hand of God. But

Here—what is this? A false note, a scream out of place. Among the houses of
the peasants, which were made not by them but by God, stands a villa, Is it the
work of a good architect or a bad one? I don’t know. J only know that the peace
and beauty of the scene have been ruined,

. how is it that every architect, good or bad, causes harm to the lake?

The peasant doesn't do this, nor the engineer who builds a railway on the shore

or sends ships ta plough their deep furrows in the waters of the lake,
It ia clear, though hardly explicit, in the following paragraphs that the
peasant builds well, in harmony with the universe, because he builds with-
out thinking about architecture, and without interference from architects.
So, presumably, does the engineer in Loos’s view, though he does not refer
to engineers again in the essay. Now, to build without interference from
architects, and their preoccupations with style and the Styles, has for
Loos at this juncture an important consequence. Without direction from
an architect

der Baumeister kOnnte nur Hauser bauven: im Stile seiner Zeit.

In the style of his own time, can only mean, in Loos’s view of the evolution
of ornament and culture, in an undecorated style. Freedom from ornament
is the symbol of an uncorrupted mind, a mind which he only attributes to
peasants and engineers. In this view succeeding generations were to follow
him, thus laying further foundations to the idea of engineers as noble
savages (to which Marinetti also contributed) and also—and this is vital in
the creation of the International Style—laying further foundations to the
idea that to build without decoration is to build like an engineer, and thus
i a manner proper to a Machine Age.

Section two

ITALY? FUTURIST MANIFESTOS AND PROJECTS,
Igog-1914

Boccioni, U: Pittura, Scultura Futurista, Milan, 1914
(for a general account of the movement’s attitudes and the
texts of the earlier manifestos).
Marinetti, F. T: Le Futurisme, Paris, 1912.
La Splendeur Géometrique et Mécanique (manifesto),
Milan, 1914.
Caramel and Longatti: Antonio Sant’Elia (catalogue of the permanent
exhibition at Villa Olmo), Como, 1962.
Sartoris, A: L'Architetio Antonio Sant’ Elia, Milan, 1930.
(for the best text of the Manifesto dell’ architetiura futurista),
Gambillo and Fiori: Archioi del Futurismo, Rome, 1958.
Periodicals
Rivista Teentca, 7, 1956.
(for the text of the Messageto suil’ architettura moderna).

oo

&: Futurism: the Foundation Manifesto

THE QUALITIES WHICH made Futurism a turning-point in the development
of Modern theories of design were primarily ideological, and concerned
with attitudes of mind, rather than formal or technical methods—though
these attitudes of mind were often influential as vehicles in the transmission
of formal and technical methods which were not, in the first place, of
Futurist invention.

The new ideological orientation of the Futurista can be seen as early as
the Foundation Manifesto, published in Le Figaro, 20 February 1909. This
Manifesto was entirely the work of Fillipo Tomaso Marinetti, the founder
and continuous animator of the Futurist Movement. Though originally
written in French (Marinetti was a graduate of the Sorbonne, in Letters)
and only subsequently translated into Italian, it was apparently written in
Milan, and is, certainly, substantially autobiographical.’ It consists of
three parts, not separately titled but different in structure and style. The
first (or Frotogue) is narrative, the second sets out a programme of action
and beliefs in tabulated form, and the third is a reflective Epilogue.

The first and second sections are of the greatest interest in the present
context, the Prologue in identifying Marinetti’s state of mind and the
social setting that enframed it, the second in formulating the Futurist
attitude to various aesthetic and cultural problems.

The Prologue opens with a piece of jfin-de-sidcle stage-setting

We had been awake all night my friends and 1, under the mesque-lamps whose

filigree copper bowls were constellated like our very soula .. . we had trampled

out our ancestral ertmed on opulent turkey carpets, arguing to the Jimits of

reasoning, and blackening innumerable sheets of paper with our frantic scrib-

In the middle of the next paragraph, the tone of voice begins to change
We were alone before the hostile stars . . . alone with the stokers who sweat

1 The two best sources on early Futurism are the contributions of Paolo Buzzi
end Benedetta Marinetti to the special issue of Cahiers d'Art devoted to Italian
painting (Paris, 1950), and Libero di Libera’s ‘Antolopia Futurista’ in Civiltd deile
iMfacchine (Rome, March 1954).

before the satanic furnaces of great ships, alone with the black phantoms who

ferret in the red-hot bellies of locomotives as they hurtle forward at insensate

speeds,...
and then the change of tone is gathered up into two powerfully contrasted
poetic images

We all started up, at the sound of a double-deck tram rumbling past, ablaze

with multi-coloured lights, like a village in festival dress that the flooded Po

tears from its banks and sweeps through gorges and rapids, down to the sea. Bur

afterwards, the silence grew deeper, and we heard only the muttered devotions

of the oid canal and the creaking of the arthritic, ivy-bearded old palaces until

~—suddenly—we heard the roar of famished motor-cars beneath the windows.
These passages have a precise topographical location, which adds point to
their superficial poetic meaning. The opening lines are not a pastiche of
a decadent novel, but are a factual description of the interior of the Casa
Marinetti, furnished with oriental bric-4-brac acquired by his parents
during their stay in Alexandria (where Marinetti himself was born). The
Casa stood in the via del Senato (it has since been pulled down) and
backed on to the ancient Navigiio canal (an alleged work of Leonardo da
Vinci, now abandoned) whose noise of waters was still a feature of the dis-
trict, although it had ceased to be used for navigational purposes. ‘The ald
palaces stood on its further bank. ‘The tram would have passed down the
via del Senato itself, and the contrast between an outmoded technology at
the back of the house, and a new and visually stimulating one at the front
must have made a very forcible impression on a person like Marinetti, al-
ready sensitive about the backward looking Borghese culture of northern
Italy and its contrast to the experimental and adventurous atmosphere of
Paris, his other home,

The sense of the overriding of an old, tradition-bound technology,
unchanged since the Renaissance, by a newer one without traditions was
something which poets and philosophers of other European countries had
already felt, and it had left its mark on their writings. The experience had
in some cases been so gradual that, as in England, it had produced no
cultural crisis (outside the ‘Arts and Crafts’ reaction) or had been preceded
by other disturbances so radical—as in the case of France where the
Encyclopedists had built much of the new technology into their work, and
the Revolution had dominated other cultural changes—so radica! that
technology did not rank, of itself, as a major psychological impact.

But the scale of nineteenth-century technological developments had been
both large, and remote, Apart from the introduction of gas-lighting, the
appearance of the streets of most capital cities hardly altered between 1800
and 1880, after which the increasing use of buses and trams, and their
subsequent mechanisation began te alter the urban pattern more rapidly,
But the early growth of industry in the Black Country, for instance, made
little difference to the daily, horse-drawn, flame-lit life of the English
opinion-forming classes.


To a north-Italian, the impact was neither gradual nor remote, however.
Though railways began to be built in Italy soon after 150, they were in
the centre or the south (Florence, Posilippo) and the large scale indus-
trialisation of the north did not begin until after the Resorgimenio.* Towns
like Milan and Turin suddenly found themselves changed from princely
or ducal capitals into subsidiaries of a revived Rome, but they also found
themselves transformed into industrial centres. ‘The existing aristocracy
and intelligentsia of the north found its social foundations drastically
altered {in contradistinction to the gradual shift of authority in, e.g.
England) and the appearance of their towns dramattcally altered at the
same time—new tram replacing old canal. Furthermore these changes took
place not in some remote province, but literally on the doorsteps of their
ancestral palaces.

It was this manifest and radical change-over to a technological society
which animated the whole of Futurist thought, and it was the sense
of sudden change which, in all probability, enabled them to exploit
more quickly than other European intellectuals the new experiences
which they had in common with the poets and painters of Paris, London,
New York, Brussels and Berlin. For the Prologue to the Manifesto
continues

We drew near to the snorting beasts and laid our hands on their burning
breasts. Then I flung myself like a corpse on a bier across the seat of my
tmachine, but sat up at once under the steering-wheel, poised like a guillotine
blade against my stomach

and there follows a lengthy and highly-coloured description of an early-
morning impromptu motor-race through the outer suburbs of Milan. The
tone of this passage is very pro-automobile, and this is one of the earliest
appreciations of the pleasures of motoring to appear in European literature.
However, the pages that describe the car-race have a deeper significance
than this. If the events described in the Prologue to the Manifesto took
place in 1908, then they are events of a kind that could hardly have taken
place ten years earlier—it is extremely doubtful if any group of young men
in their twenties could have commanded, in 1898, a number of reliable
automobiles at 5 a.m., and driven them themselves. The cultural impor-
tance of this situation is this: not only had the new technology invaded the
street (trams, electric-lighting, Lithographed posters} and the home (tele-

1 At the time of the unification of Italy, the country’s economy was primarily
agranan—and in rora it was still 90. But the process of industrialisation in the
north, which had begun with the introduction of steam power into textile factories
in the 1860's was violently accelerated in the period of Futunsm. Production of
textiles trebled in the period between 1900 and 1912, the output of iron and steel
rose frem 300,000 metric tons to almost 1,000,000 metric tons in the same period,
and other industries experienced comparable increases. At the same time, the crea-
tion of an automobile industry capable of producing machines that could hold their
own in international competition gave industry a glow of psychological prestige
that mere increase in quantity of established products could not have done.

phone, sewing machine, electric-lighting, fans, vacuum cleaners, etc.) but
with the advent of the motor-car the poet, painter, intellectual, was no
longer a passive recipient of technological experience, but could create it
for himself, The command of vehicles of the order of 60 h.p. and upwards
had hitherto been in the hands of professional specialists—engine drivers,
ships’ engineers and so forth. But the advent of the automobile brought
such experiences and responsibilities within the scope of the rich amateur
in the years immediately after 1900, and although experience of motoring
was to leave its mark on much of the literature of the twentieth century
no one was to treat it in so high and lyrical a strain as the Futurists, and
none with so strong a sense of its being a new cultural factor, without poetic
precedent. As Boccioni later phrased it®

The era of the great mechanised individuals has begun, and all the rest is
Palaeontology . . . therefore we claim to be the primitives of a sensibility that
has been completely overhauled.

No such precise form of words appears in the Foundation Manifesto, but
it is implied in at least one place where Marinetti interrupta the wild flow
of automotive rhetoric to say

Ours was no ideal love, lost in the soaring clouds, nor 4 cruel queen te whom
we must offer our bodies contorted like Byzantine jewellery

and this, on the evidence of his later writings, is to be interpreted as a pibe
at d’Annunzio, whose sensibility, the Futurists always claimed, had never
been properly overhauled (though he too turned to automobilism in the
next year). Any survival of nineteenth-century sensibility, whether symbo-
list or decadent, they regarded as improper to the changed situation. of the
new century, even though Marinetti himself was deeply indebted to such
characteristic nineteenth-century figures as Whitman and Mallarmé for
the growth of his own sensibility. Yet Whitman, whose work he knew in
translation, could offer—as no European poet could at that time—a vision
of a world of grandiose individuality, a world where machinery was an
accepted part of Jife. Such a world was still, for a cultured European, an
alien one, that could only be entered through a violent psychological
change, such as Marinetti pantomimes at the end of the Prologue.

... TL swung the ear round in its own length, like a mad dog trying to bite ita
own tail, and there, wobbling towards me were two cyclists, as confusing as two
equally convincing argumenta, right in my line of travel. I pulled up se short
that the car, to my disgust, looped into the ditch and care to rest with its wheels
in the air.

© maternal ditch, brimming with muddy water—O factory drain! I gulped
down your nourishing mud and remembered the black breasts of my Sudanese
nurse, And yet, when I emerged, ragged and dripping from under the capsized
ear, I felt the hot iron of a delicious joy in my heart.

*In his preface to the catalogue of the first exhibition of Futurist painting in
Paris, 1912.


we ee -

ee eee ss

aa Se See

This is clearly to be taken as a mimic baptism in Jordan, an initiation—

from the ground up—into the experiences and mental categories of the

alien world of mechanical sensibility, for immediately after it comes
And so, face covered in good factory mud—plastered in swarf and slag, sweat

and soot—bruised and in splints, but undaunted yet, we pronounce our funda-
mental will to all the live spirits of the world.

and then follow the tabulated propositions of the second section.

There are eleven of these propositions, declamatory in style, and not all
of sufficient relevance to the present context to justify quotation at length.
The first and second praise danger, energy, audacity, etc. the third con-
trasts the Futurist passion for movement and activity against ‘Literature’
(probably meaning d’Annunzio} which exalts repose, ecstasy and dreams.
The fourth is the best known of all pieces of Futurist writing.

4. We declare that the splendour of the world has been enriched by a new
beauty—the beauty of speed. A racing car with its bonnet draped with exhaust-
pipes like fire-breathing serpents—a roaring racing car, rattling along like a
machine gun, is more beautiful than the winged victory of Samothrace,
And this exaltation of the spectacle of turbulent, noisy motion above the
contemplation of stlent Classical repose, is followed by an exaltation of the
dynamic experience of automobilism.

5. We will hymn the man at the steering wheel, whose ideal axis passes through

the centre of the earth, whirling round on its orbit,
Succeeding propasitions praise speed, announce the annihilation of space
and time, and praise war as the cleanser of society (something for which
later critics have never forgiven the Futurists, but which remains under-
standable when it is remembered that with Italian populations around the
northern Adriatic still frredentt, the Risorgimento remained a war that was
still in progress for many Italian patriots} as the cleanser of society from
the adiposities of an unadventurous dorghese peace, attacked also in the
tenth proposition.

1o. We will destroy all museums and libraries, and academies of all sorts: we

will battle against moralism, feminism, and ali vile opportunism and utili-

tarian7si
This was a proposition on which he later had second thoughts, for while
the hostility to acadermies and the past remained, feminism (of a sort) was
later built into the Futurist programme as (a), the epitome of a new kind
of unromantic woman, in opposition to d’Annunzio’s heroines, and (4),
as something which would break up Eberal parliamentarism {and thus ‘vile

“Many Futurist manifestations had political intentions—or at least acquired
them—particulariy in Trieste and Venice, where the sense of Italia Irredenta was,
understandably, still highly inflamed. This strain in Futurist thought led, logically,
to demands for intervention in the War, and fess logically, though understandably
given the dynamics of politics, to Futuriat participation in Fascist uprisings after
1918.

epportunism and utilitarianism’) as soon as women had the right to vote,
The eleventh proposition concludes this sequence with an apotheosis of the
urban and mechanised setting of Futurist life,

ri. We will sing of the stirring of great crowds—workers, pleasure-seekers,
rioters—and the confused sea of colour and scund as revolution aweeps through
a modern metropolis. We will sing the midnight fervour of arsenals and ship-
yards blazing with electric moons; insatiable stations swallowing the smoking
serpents of their trains, factories hung from the clouds by the twisted threada
of their smoke; bridges flashing like knives in the sun, giant gymnasts that leap
over rivers; adventurous steamers that scent the horizon; deep-chested loco-
motives that paw the ground with their wheels, like stallions harnessed with
steel tubing; the easy flight of aeroplanes, their propellers beating the wind like
banners, with a sound Like the applause of a mighty crowd,

Though many of these images are derived from nineteenth-century
sources (the locomotive, for instance, fromm Whitman and Huysmans,®}
many could be nothing but new, particularly the aeroplane, since practic-
able aircraft had existed in Europe only since 1906. But, in any case, such
a concatenation of mechanistic images seems to be without precedent in
European literature at the time, and the emphasis on motion and disorder
is in strong contrast to the static and monumental aspects of engineering
which seem to bave been admired by German writers of the same period.
The third section of the Manifesto, which is in the nature of a personal
apologia has little to add to the position already taken up—except to add
a rather pathetic note on the youth of the Marinetti circle

The oldest among us is only thirty, and we have therefore at least ten years in

which to do our work
and to couple with it the first intimation of that sense of transience which
was to become a regular motif in Futurist thought. A sense of transience m
which the ageing of human beings is linked to the obsolescence of their
technical equipment. Marinetti envisages a younger generation, more truly
Futurist than his own that would find him, and his friends

squatting fearfully by our aeroplanes . . . and all, exasperated by our daring, will
rush to kill us, driven by hatred made more implacable by the extent to which
their hearts are filled with love and admiration.

This is something more than the routine Romantic contempt for old men,
just as the whole Manifesto is more than the provincial juvenilia which it is

*Huysman’s enthusiasm for locomotives became a by-word and was still a
subject for comment in the Twenties—Le Corbusier used it a4 a point of reference
in a potted history of locomotives in Urbantsme (see chapter 18). For aircraft there
was not, and could not be, any comparable tradition of enthustasm. The first
demonstrably successful European machine was the Voisin Canard flown by
Santos Dumont in 1906 near Paris. However, any widespread eye-witness ex-
perience of aircraft, such as Marinetti must have enjoyed in order to write a passage
ao conspicuously different from H. G, Wells's imaginative projections of aviation,
must have waited on the Wright Brothers’ European tour of 1gos.

"See the opinions of Muthesijus, Gropius and others quoted in chapter 5.


commonly made out to be. As will be seen, simply by being a young man,
by being both a cosmopolitan intellectual by training and a provincial
patriot by cisposition, Marinetti was able to give a widespread feeling of
disgust with the old and craving for the new, a positive orlentation and a
point of attachment in the world of fact; Marinetti ordered his generation
into the street with his Manifestoes, in order to revolutionise their culture,
just as the political Manifestoes fram which he took over the literary form
had ordered men into the street to revolutionise their politics,

9: Futurism: theory and development

THE ATTITUDE ADOPTED by Marinetti in the Foundation Manifesto was a
poet's attitude, adopted for the benefit of other poets. Their response was
direct and before three years had elapsed a characteristic type of Futurist
lyric had appeared, written in short-lined vers Hore revealing an overall
debt to late nineteenth-century French poetry, and taking as its subject-
matter PFlettricitd (Luciano Fulgore) A un Aviatore (Libero Altomare),
fi Canto della Citta dt Mannheim {Paolo Buzzi), etc. The magazine Poesia,
and Marinetti’s associated publishing activities, became the main instru-
ments of Futurist literary activity.

As early as 1900, however, there is a poem of Buzzi's dedicated to Um-
berto Boccioni, beginning

Erige les constructions massives pour la ville future

Quelle s'éléve dans le ciel libre des aviateurs
which indicates that the Poesta circle were already in contact with practi-
tioners of the plastic arts, and that at least one of the great Futurist themes,
the City of Tomorrow,! was already in circulation. The memoirs of Signora
Benedetta Marinetti state that in the same month as the publication of the
Foundation Manifesto, Marinetti met Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carra, and
Luigi Rusgolo, and later in the year Giacomo Balla. These four, with the
addition of Gino Severini, constitute the main body of Futurist painters,
and together they signed the Manifesto of the Futurist Painters (11 Feb-
ruary 1910) and the Technical Manifesto of Futurist Painting, published in
April of the same year, on the ‘canonical’ eleventh day (no fewer than eight
of the Manifestoes were published on the eleventh of the month),

These two Manifestoes concerned with painting, and the later one on
sculpture, are basic points of departure for al! Futurist activity in the plastic
arts. But they need to be taken in a complicated context which must include
the continuing literary activity of Marinetti (some of which was not pub-
lished in permanent form until after the two painting Manifestoes) and must
also include developments in the painting of the School of Paris.

1As exemplified by Antonio Sant'Elia’s projects La Citta Nuova and Milano
2000; which are discussed in the next chapter.

However, there is a gap before this second context becomes fully effec-
tive, for in 1910 only Severinz had actually been to Paris, and seen Fauve
and Cubist painting at first hand. The February Manifesto is, in fact,
almost purely literary, net te say political. The young artists of Italy are
called upon to rebel against the senseless and snobbish cult of the past.
Other nations treat Italy as a whited Pompeii of sepulchres, whereas, in
fact Italy has been reborn; the political Risorgimento has been followed by
an intellectual one, etc. ete. This is for the most part Marinettian, but the
Manifesto does contain some new material, some of a primarily professional
nature, some of more general aesthetic consequence. Thus

Just as our ancestors found their inspiration in the world of religion which
weighed upon their souls, so we must draw ours from the tangible miraclea of
contemporary life. ..

indicating a rather subtle approach to the problem of the painters’ inspira-
tion, transferring it to the world of ideas, rather than visual facts,

The attack which follows on academic offtcialdom for not recognising
the talents of Segantini, Previati and Medardo Rosso is more than the
‘trade union’ affair that it might appear. These men were the representatives
of a Milanese tradition of Modernism of which the Futurists were the cul-
mination, and Medardo Rosso was particularly important to them as an
innovator in both iconography and methed,

The one reference to architecture (which appears among the denuncia-
tions): An end to Big Business architecture and reinforced concrete con-
tractors, is in direct contradiction to the later architectural policy of the
Futurists and probabiy opposed to Marinetti’s own views at that time. It
suggests that Futurist painting did not yet exist in visible or material form,
and that their theories existed only on paper, for, once they had found them-
selves as painters, materials like concrete, cardboard, etc. were soon in
favour with them.

The ‘Fechnical Manifesto of April was written in this same vacuum, but
it is less rhetorical (the February Manifesto had been ‘launched’ at a
quasi-political Futurist demonstration m Turin}? and penetrates far deeper
into the basic mental orientations of its authors. It emphasises the dynamic
against the static, the deformation and multiplication of visual images
caused by retinal persistence. It emphasises that art is based upon conven-
tions and that ‘truths’ are expendable, that space is (visually) merely one
of these conventions, that X-rays have introduced new analogues of
normal vision.

For practical confirmation of the destruction of traditional and static
mades of vision, the Manifesto instances

The celebrated meeting at the Politeama Chiarella, g February 1910, which
later became a legend in Futurist circles since its more violent passages made exce]
lent newspaper copy and thus established the movernent in the public mind.

The sixteen people around you in a tram are successively one, ten, four, three,
They hold still momentarily, but then they shift again, coming and going with
the swaying and bouncing of the tram ... persistent symbols of universal
motion.
a passage which draws heavily upon Medardo Rosso, who had not only
insisted on the transience of appearances

We are all of ua merely lighting effects"

but had, in physical fact, created precisely the visual image under discua-
sion in his sculpture-group Jmpressione d’ Omnibus (1884) where the figures
seem to be undergoing precisely the same kind of dissolution in movement.
and flickering light as the Futurists had in mind.

Futurist paintings from this period are now extremely rare, having been
destroyed or painted over, but a number of Boccionis from before 1911
have survived, and often show an attempt to translate back into painting
the atmospheric style of sculpture which Medardo himself had derived
from the paintings of the Impressionists. Medardo was passionately
admired by Boccioni and provided a link back to a live Milanese Impres-
sionist tradition, skipping the generation of Synthetists and Nabis in Paris,
whose work he could only know about through Severini. ‘This link with the
Impressionist tradition is important because it is part of the anti-academiec
heritage which the Futurists were to pass on to later Modern-Movement
theory, even though it was contradicted in so much of their practice.

For the Technical Manifesto still gives no directives as to what 2 Futurist
painting should look like in material fact. Its tabulated propositions formu-
late a frame of mind only

WE PROCLAM

r. That an inherent complementarity is as necessary to painting as vers fbre
to poetry or polyphony to music

. That the universal dynamism must be rendered as dynamic sensation

. That in the interpretation of nature there must be sincerity and chastity

. That light and motion destroy the solidity of bodies

fw

WE COMBAT
. Patina and the obscurity of false antiques
2. Superticial archaism . ..
3. False Futurists, secessionists and independents, the new academics of every
country.
4. The nude in painting, just as tiresome and depressing as adultery in
literature.

=

It is interesting to observe that the positive propositions are their own
{or Medardo’s) while the negative ones, except no. 3, are essentially
Marinetti’s, the attack on the nude being an extension of the attack on the
Dannunzian preoccupation with adultery (‘d’Annunzio, toujours penché
sur le corps nu d'une ferme’). Negative proposition no. 3, however, is

* The most informative short atudy of Medardo Rosse in English is that by
P.M, Fitzgerald in World Review (London, June 1951).


rather remarkable for its date, for the general tendency of European avanti-
garde aesthetics at the time was to continue the academicising tendencies
of the Nineties, as can be seen from the writings of Roger Fry,* or the
Cubist circle in Paris. Even so truculent an anti-Secessionist as Adolf Loos
remained a Classicist at heart,* and the Futurists seem to have been almost
alone in seeing that Platonic and Ciassicising aesthetics were out of tune
with their mechanolatry, or, indeed, any positive and fruitful accommoda-
tion to the new technology.

Before the next major Manifesto on the plastic arts appeared, however
{that on Sculpture, over Boccioni’s unsupported signature, 11 April 1912}
the scope of Futurism had been broadened by further writings and
lectures from Marinetta, and the painters had visited Paris, The whole
aspect of the movernent was altered. The visit to Paris was organised, and
largely paid for, by Marinetti, but his own contacts in Paris (e.g. Gustave
Kahn) were not of much direct value to the painters. Severini, however,
could claim acquaintance with Braque, and through him the T'uturists met
Picasso and the rest of the Cubist circle. The situation of Cubism at this
moment was extremely interesting. 1g11, in retrospect, appears to be the
year of culmination, in which the promise of Picasso’s ‘Girl with the Man-
dolin’ (191¢) was fully realised in the ‘Portrait of Kahnweiler’, the year of
Braque’s ‘Le Portugais’, in both of which formalised fragments of repre-
sentational painting are splintered down inte a shallow layer of space,
whose depth is indicated without recourse to academic perspective. The
contact with such painters and such paintings had a galvanic effect on the
Futurists and uncertainty as to the appearance of their painting disap-
peared, they took over from the Cubists a repertoire, a dinguaggio, of
formal devices and surface treatments and turned them to their own ends.

That those ends were not those of Cubism needs to be emphasised at this
point, Cubism stood at the end of a long reformist tradition that runs back
through Cezanne tewards Courbet; and Boccioni, at least, recognised this.
Its aesthetics when they came to be written were traditionalist and aca-
demic, and in na way as revolutionary as those of Futurism—chiefly be-
cause Cubism was a revolution within painting itself, and not part of a
profound reorientation towards a changed world.’ Nevertheless, the for-

‘For these tendencies in Roger Fry see his ‘Essay on Aesthetics’ in Vision and
Design (London, 1923) and for the Cubists see the works discussed in chapter 15.

* The Classical streak appears not only in his writings, which are discussed in
chapter 7, but also in the persistent use he made of such motifs as the Daric
column; the Geldmann and Saiatsch store in Vienna (1910) which, like Peter
Sehrens’s Mannesmann office block, uses Doric to mark the entrance, and his entry
for the Chicago Tribune Tower competition employing a Greek Doric column,
magnified to a giant scale, to pive the form of the whole upper part of the block,
with the windows let into the flutings!

* In Boccieni’s preface to the catalogue of the first Paris exhibition he asserts,
‘Tf our pictures are Futurist, it is because they represent the reault of conceptions of
ethics, aesthetics, politics and sociology that are absolutely Futurist!’

mal and superficial resemblances in the paintings, coupled with certain
literary resemblances between Apollinaire’s writings and those of the
Futurists, have led to a belief that Futurism was derived from Cubism.
In fact, Apollinaire’s book Les Pem#éres Cubistes did not appear until 1913
and had been anticipated by Futurist Manifestoes on painting, sculpture,
literature and music, as wellj as in prefaces to the catalogues of Futurist
exhibitions in Paris (1912, 1913) while, as will appear from what has been
said above, Futurist interest in the dissolution of bodies antedates their
encounter with Cubism by over a year. ‘Their interest in the dismember-
ment of forms was their ewn; it was a method for doing it which they picked
up in Paris. Their interest in bodies m motion was their own, tt was a
convention for representing motion which they learned from the Cubists,

The Cubists from whom they acquired this device were the Groupe de
Puteaux, a group centring round the Duchamp family, on the fringe of the
Picasso/Braque circle. The Puteaux group’ were to make more than one
contribution to the development of modern design, and what they
could offer to the Futurists at this point was an intellectual and dia-
grammatic approach toe painting, rather than the intuitive and quasi-
representational approach of Braque or Picasso. In Marcel Duchamp’s
‘Coffee Mill’ (an occasional work undertaken as a wedding present for his
brother) of early 1gr1 they would be able to see® not only a machine ‘dis-
mantled’ in order to show its functions, but also a convention for showing
the different successive positions of the crank as turned. This work was
probably done under the mfluence of the early Futurist Manifestoes, but
that dees not alter the fact that the Futurists themselves had not yet
arrived at any such set of conventions for either motion or the dissolution
of forms. )

‘The influence of the Paris visit was apparent in their work immediately
on their return to Milan, successive-state representation of motion soon
appears in the work of Balla (e.g. the celebrated ‘Dog on a Leash’ of 1912)
but it was upon Boccioni that the impact was greatest,

He had put in hand, shortly before the departure for Paris, a series of
three paintings entitled Stato d’ Animo: “The Farewells’, “Those who Go’,
‘Those who Stay’. The earliest sketches for these are almost completely
abstract fields of waving, hurrying, or loitering forms. All were drastically
reworked on his return, and the abstract fields were filled with broken,
superimposed, and transparent elements of engines and rolling stock, car-
riages and faces, hats, macintoshes and buildings. The pictorial conventions
employed in creating these elements are an intelligent and original blend
of the methods of Duchamp and those of Braque—systematically geometri-
cal in construction but richly dappled and textured as to the actual paint

* On the subject of the Groupe de Puteaux see chapter 15. ;
* Duchamp, himself, does not believe there can have been any influence from thia
painting, and modestly proposes photographic motion studies as a common source,


surface. The first of these paintings ("The Farewells’) also contains elements
of typography, used as part of the planimetric composition of the picture.
Such a usage, which lies at the root of much typographical reform later in
the century, and also paved the way for the reintegration of typography
into architectural composition, is generally regarded as a Cubist invention
of 1911 (Braque: ‘Le Portugais’}, but if so Beccioni may have arrived at it
in the same months, fer one late drawing for “The Farewells’ in which
typographical elements occur, seems datable to 1911, not 1912. ‘Though
this could still be a borrowing from Braque, of course, it should be further
noted that the person close to Boccioni who was most interested in typo-
graphy was Marinetti, who had acquired from his contacts with Mallarmé
an interest in free, varied and open page-composition,’ in which words and
even letters were treated as elements m an abstract design, Although
Marinetti’s Les Mots en Liberté was not published until 1919, the word
Mothbriste was in Futurist circulation before 1914, and Boccioni refers to
parole in Hberta early in 1912.

It is in connection with Boccioni’s sculptural activities of 1912 that the
growing fusion between Parisian practice and Milanese theory is most
clearly manifested. One of his best-known works in sculpture, “Sviluppa
d'una Bottigha nello Spazio’ dates from that year. It is a still-life subject,
something which he had not attempted before Paris, but a drawing con-
nected with this work shows more radical changes than merely a new sub-
ject-matter.

The fundamental method-of this sketch, both in terms of composition
and study of the object depends upon a rotation of the bottle about in its
own axis, while observing it from different heights. In a remote sense,
such a method had been accidently employed by Cézanne, intuitively by
Picasso. But here it is systematically employed and fully exploited. ‘The
bottle is resolved into a series of sweeping convex-concave forms which
imterpenetrate those of a glass standing beside it. There is a powerful
plastic sense of them being bodies of rotation, which is quite contrary
to the flattening tendencies of Cubism at that date, even though both the
drawing technique and the method of geometrical sectioning probably go
back to Ecole de Puteaux sources. But even more remarkable is the treat-
ment of the table-top. Where, in Cézanne or Picasso the multiplication of
table-tops due to the changing viewpoint is dispuised or ignored, it is here
given full value as part of the image, Three main table-top planes are
defined, almost parallel to one another, and their boundaries cross and

*On the subject of the origins of Futurist typography see Carlo Martini,
‘Matlarmé-Marinetti-Gide’ in Idea (Rome, 17 May 1953) and Renato Mucci,
‘Mallarmé Pubblicista’ in Civilia delle Macchine (Rome, November 1954). In this
connection it is interesting to note that Michel Seuphor has suggested that it may
have been Marinetti who introduced the idea of the calligram, or figurate poem,
inte the circle of Apollinaire, and this could have triggered the Cubists’ interest in

typography.

override one another at the corners. Since these effects are created within
a more or less conventional perspective we are presented with a spatial
experience analogous ta the Prairie House architecture of Wright, or the
work of architects under de Stijl influence in the early Twenties.”

Boccioni’s Technical Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture appeared in April
1912; it was entirely his own responsibility, and since the actual turn of
phrase is not particularly Marinettian, probabiy entirely his own work,
The first section is a routine rhetorical denunciation of the past and un-
originality. In the second section however it justifies the word technical
far more fully than does the painting Manifesto, since after Paris he now
knew what the result should Jook like.

We must begin from the central nucleus of an object as it strives for realisation,
in order to discover the new laws, that is, the new forms, that relate it invisibly
but mathematically to the plastic infinity within, and visible plastic infiniry with-
out. The new plasticity will thus be the translation into plaster, bronze, glaas,
wood, or any other material, of the atmospheric planes thet unite and intersect
visible objects... . Thus sculpture must bring objects to life by rendering
apprehensible, plastic and systematic their prolongations inte space, since it
cannot be doubted any longer that one object finishes where another begins, and
that there is not an object around us—bottle, automobile, tree, house or street—
that dees not cut and section us with some arabesque of curved or straight lines.

The drawing discussed above is, of course, a more or less programmatic
demonstration of this field theory of aesthetic space, a space which exists
as a field of force or influence radiating from the geometrical centre of the
objects which give rise to it, and is a remarkable paetic achievement born,
presumably, of Bergson and Einstein."

The third section compares Redin, Bourdelle, and Meunier unfavourably
to Medarde Rosso, who is apotheosised (correctly) as the father of ‘atrnas-

© Most obviously, the overlapping planes of the Robie House of rgag, Possible
influence from Wright on Boecioni can be discounted, in spite of his wide reading
and interests. In the case of Sant’Elia, discussed in the next chapter, the possi-
bility cannot be so easily dismissed.

4 Bergson was widely discussed at the time: in the circle of the magazine
Peesia, in the Apollinaire circle (on this see Christopher Gray’s Cudist Aesthette
Theories once more) and by the Vorticists in England. The situation with Einstein
is less clear: ideas martpinal to the theortes of relativity were certainly current m
Cubist circles, and Gleizes refers confusedly ta Reimannian geometry in du
Cubisme, and Apoliinaire, in a much-quoted and over-rated passage of his Petutres
Cubisfes refers to fa qitatriéme dimension as a piece of established studio jargon by
1912. Although doubt has been cast on the ability of the Cubists to know about such
matters, it is clear that the Braque~Picasso circle picked up a certain amount of
mathematical gossip fram the actuary Maurice Princet (see chapter 15) while the
interests of the Puteaux group were notoriously mathematical and philosophical,
Boccioni appears to have picked up some of his interests in these quarters but
seems to have an independent source aa weli, since he later became very critica!
of Apallinaire’s views on the fourth dimension. Lumping Cubista and Futurists
together for the purpose of argument, however, it would appear thet Giedion’s
proposition that resemblances between the painting of the period and Einsteinian
ideas are simply ‘a temporal coincidence’ should be treated with some reserve—
the possibility of consciously ‘Relativistic’ art cannot be maled out,

1
L

36, Pablo Picasso. Portrait of
D-If. Kahnweiler, 1911:
another canonical Cubist

work of the kind that assisted
the Futurists in the creatian of
their characteristic mode of
Vision.

37 (left), Marcel Duchamp. The Coffee
Mill, 1911: much closer to Futurist ideas
than any comparable Parisian work of the
period, it analyses the workings of the
machine, the rotation of its parts.

38, Umberto Boccioni, La Strada entra
netia casa, 1gtianearly realisation of the
Futurist concept of the city as a field of
interacting powers and influences.

39. Umberto Bocecioni. Srai
d@'.4ntmo TT, Quellt chi vanag,
19127 the second panel of a
miptych expressing the
emotions felt in a radway
terminal: here, departure.
40. Umberto Hoccioni.
Composition sketch for Stati
@Anmo I, Gi Adi: once in
the Walden collection, this
version of "The Farewells’
played a part in meking
Futurist interests in
typography known outside
Ttaly.

43, Umberto Beccioni,
Hattigtia + Tavela

+ Caseggiata, 1912: asketch
connected with the sculpture
Bottle evolving in Space,
combining the concepts of
moving viewpomt and field
theory of space,

43. Antonio Sant'Elia.

Central Station of the Cita
Nuova, 1913-1904: derived in
its turn from the above, hut
with far preater formal and
mechanical definition, this was
one of the carefully rendered
drawings of a new city C(Milane
2000} exhibited in rgt4.

gz. Antonia Sant’Elia.
Staztone Acroplant, 1912: one
of the sequence of sketches
deriving from the problem of
rebuilding Milan Central
Station: multi-level planning
and an aircraft landing strip
are already present.


44, 4§. Antonio Sant’Elia.
Projects for an airship hangar
and electric generating station,
both 1913. In sketches such

as these Sant’ Eha gave almost
‘Wrerkbund Expressionist’
form to the Futurists’
admiration for certain types of
industrial buildings.

46. Antonio Sant’ Etia.
Casa a Gradinate, 1914!
one of the Citta Nuova
projects, this drawing of
a stepped-back block of
flats with illuminated
skyline advertising
became one of the best
known of Sant’Elia’s
desipns outside Italy.
47,48, Antonio

Sant’ Elia. Projects for a
lighthouse and an
electric generating
station, 19t7. Some of
Sant’Elia's drawings
reveal an undecorated
and geometrically pure
made of design that
seems to anticipate the
architecnure of the
1939's.


ae LW eA ae

49. Antonio Sant'Elis. La Citta Nuova, 1914: the most
fully worked out of all the perspectives of Sant’ Elia’s
new city, bringing together skyscraper towers and
multi-level circulation in an image that has dominated
modern ideas of town-planning right down to the
present time.

50. Mario Chiattone,
Project for a black of
flats, 1gi4. Chiattone,
Sant’ Elia's associate of
igl4j-1915, produced a
number of projects for
apattment-blocks that
were known and—in tha
case of this one—sorne+
what influential in
northern Evurape.

51. Mario Chiattone.
Project for ¢ block of
flats, 1914: one of the
most prophetic of
Funurist drawings—in
detail at least, though
the remarkable use of
colour-wash hag not
been imitated,


pheric’ sculpture, and of ‘unherocic’ sculptural subjects, However, Medardo
is criticised for remaining pictorial in inspiration, and for not developing
in the direction of ‘Jo stile def movimento’, This style, by systernatising the
vibrations of light and the interpenetration of pianes
. will produce Futurist sculpture, whose basis is architectonic, not only as 4
construction of masses, but also because the sculptural block will contain
within itself architectonic elements from the sculptural environment in which
the object exists.
This idea is clearly a development from the previous quotation, and it was
to lead in Sant’Elia’s work to a remarkable redefinition of the man/building
relationship, but for Boccioni it was to have only the crudest consequences.

Thus, from the armpit of a mechanic there could protrude a gearwheel, the line

of a table could slice through the head of 2 man reading, and the fanned pages of

the book could section his stornach.
Though at a more theoretical and metaphysical level this idea clearly antici-
pates, again, developments of the Twenties

. We proclaim the absolute and complete abolition of determined lines and

closed statues. We split open the figure and include the environment within it
anticipating the breakdown of the barriers between inside and out which is
ta be seen in the architecture of 1927-33, and there follows (from a discus-
sion of the concept ines-of-force) a further, and rather subtle, prevision of
the aesthetics of the Twenties

For ua, the straight line will. be alive and palpitating; will lend itself to ail the
expressive necessities af our material, and its basic bare severity will be a symbol
of the metallic severity of the lines of modern machinery
in which the subtlety lies in seeing that the straight line would be symbolic
of, and not inherent in, mechanical design.
Two other points from this Manifesto deserve to be noted here, The
adumbration of kinetic sculpture, hardly surprising in this context
a source of power capable of giving a rhythmic movement properly related to
ita planes and jines
and a call for the extension of the range of the sculptor’s materials, which
appears among the tabulated propositions at the end of the Manifesto.
One sees Boccioni here in one of his most influential roles, as a codifier and
systematiser of ad hoc Cubist practices, and their inclusion within the body
of Futurist theory, even before they had been systematised and included
within Cubist theory.
4. Destroy the purely literary and traditional nobility of bronze and marble,
Deny that any one material should be used exclusively for the whole of a
sculptural construction. Affirm that even twenty different materials can join

in one work toa increase the scope of its plastic emotion, We enumerate some:
glass, wood, iron, cement, hair, leather, cloth, electric light, etc.

This list, in which it will be observed that concrete makes its return, is an

intelligent extensian of the principles of Cubist papiers collés, composed of
various different materials, invented by Braque in 1911, It is also positive
and mandatory jn its tone, whereas Apoilinaire’s reference to collage in
Les Peintres Cudistes, which did not appear until more than a year later,
is merely permissive (if that}

I have not one prejudice with regard to the painter’s materials

In the same year as the sculpture Manifesto, the general theory of Futurism
was carried forward and breadened by Marinetti, who published a book
composed of stray pieces, lectures, ete. which he welded into a roughly
continuous rhetorical exposition of his position under the title of Le
Futurisme, which seems to exist only in the French version, and was thus
clearly intended for imternational rather than Italian circulation,

A great deal of what is in this book contradicts widely-held beliefs
about Futurism, and brings it nearer to the accepted canons of Puritanism,
Humanitarianism, etc. on which mainstream Modern design is supposed to
rest. Marinetti proclaims that the Futurists are against Anarchism (this is
another aspect of dissociation from the immediate Symbolist past) and
against Nietzsche, whose Supermen are dismissed as an antiquarian
Grecian dream. Against eternal permanent values (also anti-Symbolist)

We who insist that a masterpiece must be burned with the corpse of its author
... 8gainst the conception of the immortal and imperishable we set up the art
of the becoming, the perishable, the transitory and the expendable

a there which was to be passed on to the architectural theories of the
Twenties, !?

Equally contrary to what is commonly supposed to be the Futurist frame
of mind is the curieus streak of puritanism which runs through this work,
Marinetti declares himself opposed to ‘clair de lune’, ‘Femme-Beauté
idéal et fatale’, Luxury, adultery, incest, the sense of sin as subjects for
literature. Though this occurs in a passage specifically aimed at d’Anoun-
zio ‘frére cadet des grands Symbolistes Frangais’, the there of an anti-
romantic attitude to woman appears elsewhere in this book, equality of
the sexes is urged, the Suffragettes are encouraged (though for the reason
cited supra), and poets are denounced in almost Platonic terms for keeping
alive the enervating myth of romantic love,

The alternative is to be the beauty of the machine, and the love of a
machine that may be seen reddening the cheeks of mechanics

You may have noticed in the last great railway strike in France that the Sabo-
tage Committees could not persuade a single mechanic to put his locomotive out
of action.

] find this natural enough. How could 2 man kill so faithful and devoted a friend?

1* In his books of the carly Twenties Le Corbusier waa much concerned with the
problem of scrapping and the impermanence (aesthetic and otherwise) of engineer-
ing structures (see chapters 17 and 18).


and a note of mechanistic irrationality is allowed to creep in

You have doubtless heard the ebservationa currently made by motorists and

factory directora—~Motors are truly mysterious, they say. It is as if they had

peraonalities, minds, sauls, You have to humour them, . . and then, suddenly,

this machine of cast ateel, made after the most precise calculations, will unex-

pectedly produce not merely its designed output but twice, three times as much,
but this, in fact, paves the way for an observation that mechanics are not
as other men are, and seem equipped with alternative sets of sensibilities
and values.

..- One finds today, with increasing ease, men of the people without culture or
education, who are nevertheless endowed already with what I call the gift of
mechanical prophecy, or the flair for metals. They are workmen who have al-
ready undergone the education of the machine, and in some way are affiliated
to machinery.

This is one of the first appearances of the idea of the engineer as a form of
noble savage, which also appears in Loos and reappears in the writings of
Le Corbusier," but does not seem to be, in Marinetti’s mind, the same
concept as ‘l*homme multiplié par le moteur’, who also appears in this
book and seems rather to be a species of educated dilettante who makes
maximum use of the technological and mechanical extensions of his experi-
ence which the twentieth century offers, one of Boccioni’s ‘great mech-
anised individuals’. Besides this reinforcement of the Futurist orientation
towards technology and technologists, Le Futurtsme also introduces three
themes of prime importance to the development of modern design: op-
position to handicraft, the un-monumental architecture of democracy,
and the power-station as an apotheosis of technology.

Whereas Adolf Loos’s opposition to handicraft was an immediate re-
action to the excesses of Sezessionist Art Nouveau in Vienna, Marinetti’s
objections go back to the theoretical sources of the Arts and Crafts Move-
ment, to Ruskin. The reasons for this are, essentially, of an occasional
nature—his lecture to the Lyceum Club in March 1912, for which he
needed a figure to symbolise English Passdisme

When, then, will you disencumber yourselves of the lymphatic ideology of
your deplorable Ruskin, whom I intend to make utterly ridiculous in your

evyes....

With his sick drearn of a primitive pastoral life; with his nostalgia for Homeric
cheeses and legendary spinning-wheels; with his hatred of the machine, of
steam and electricity, this maniac for antique simplicity resembles a man who
in full maturity wants to sleep in his cot again and drink at the breasts of a
nurse who has now grown old, in order to regain the carefree state of infancy

and this is followed by an attack on English supporters of the brick-for-
brick rebuilding of the campanile at Venice, and general abuse for the

“In Vers une Architecture Le Corbusier wrote an extraordinary eulogy of engin-
eere as ‘healthy and yinle, active and useful, balanced and happy’, as if they were
the uncorrupted aborigines of an imaginary land dreamed up by an ¢arly nine-
teenth-century Romantic (see chapter 17).

English for giving all their attention ta Rome, Venice and Florence—
‘which we consider running sores on the face of the Peninsula’—and not
to Genoa, Turin and Milan, the cities of the ‘new renascent Italy that we
love’.

The architecture of mechanised democracy, as envisaged by Marinetti,
also makes a strong contrast with Loos’s views—at least as far as the demo-
cracy is concerned, for, whereas Loos, in Das Andere, eulagises a simple
Jeffersonian frontier democracy where top hats and frock-coats need not
be worn, Marinetti is talking about big-city democracy of the mob and the
trade union.

And besides, I reply to you that a life of cosrnopelitan travel, the spirit of de-
mocracy and the decay of religions have made completely useless the vast
permanent and ornate buildings that once used te express royal authority, theo-
eracy and mysticism.
The contradictory forces of the banks, the leaders of fashion, revolutionary
syndicates, metallurgists, engineers, electricians and aviators, the right to
strike, equality before the law, the autherity of numbers, the usurping power
of the mob, the speed of international communications and the habits of hygiene
and comfort, demand instead large well-ventilated apartment houses, railways
of absolute reliability, tunnels, iron bridges, vast high-speed liners, hillside
villas open to the breeze and view, immense meeting halls and bathrooms
designed for the rapid daily care of the body,

Aesthetics, responding directiy to utility, have nothing ta do nowadays with

royal palaces of imposing line and granite basement... we oppose them with

a fully mastered and definitive Futurist aesthetic of giant locomotives, spiral

tunnels, [ronclads, torpedo boats, Antoinette monoplanes and racing cars
These three paragraphs contain, in miniature, the arguments and contrasts
of the theories of the Twenties. Classical architecture contrasted against
engineering products, buildings equated with railways and bridges—seen,
that is, as equipment, and three main building types identified, outside of
the field of transport and communications: large, wetl-ventilated low-
rental blocks, suburban villas sited for view and breeze, halls of assembly.
These were to be the dominating architectural themes of Le Corbusier; the
most striking difference between this passage and similar writing after the
Great War, however, is the absence of social conscience—Marinetti sees
this range of better equipment not as the transcendental social right of
democratic man, but as things that must be given to a politically conscious
and active working class. Here is realism bordering on a cynicism that
could become Fascist,

The theme of the power-station is one that was peculiarly Marinetti’s
own. Widely distributed in Modern Movement rhetoric after the War, it
seems to be found in his writings alone, before 1914. It occurs in Le
Futurisme at the end of a highly emotive passage in which Marinetti has
envied the men of the Two-thousands, who will live in an Italy

. . entirely revivified, shaken and tamed by new electrical energies

4 A periodical pamphlet en manners and morals published by Locs in the first
years of the century and anthologised in Tretsdem.

whose power, derived from the harnessing of the sea, will be controlied by
a kind of technocracy of engineers who

... live in high tension chambers where a hundred-thousand volts flicker through
great bays of glass. They sit at control panels with meters, switches, rheostats
and commmutaters to right and left, and everywhere the rich gleam of polished
levers. These men enjoy, in short, « life of power between walls of iron and
crystal; they have furniture of steel, rventy times lighter and cheaper than ours,
They are free at last from the examples of fragility and softness offered by wood
and fabrics with their rural ornarnents. ... Heat, humidity and ventilation regu-
lated by a brief pass of the hand, they feel the fullness and solidity of their own
will...

The tone of voice is that of science-fiction, and fairly clear debts to Jules
Verne can be seen, but this is science-fiction of the rare type that comes
true in detail, Power-stations are uncommonly like this nowadays and the
passage has, anyhow, the singing tones of prophecy. It fixes a vision of a
smart, glittering, busimesslike technological life, and a corresponding archi-
tecture, which was to haunt the imagination of the next generation.

Two years later, Marinetti returned to this theme in his Mantfesto of
Geometrical and Mechanical Splendour, and the Sensibility of Numbers
(March 1914}, but with a difference

Nothing ig more beautiful than a great humming power-station, holding back
the hydraulic pressures of a whole mountain range, amd the electric power for
a whole landscape, synthesised in control-panels bristling with levers and gleam-
Ing commutators

The science-fiction quality is missing; apart from the control-panel, the
pomt of human contact, the qualities of the image are now an abstract
immensity, pressures and powers, éeyrdonnante has a Jow-toned and sup-
pressed quality about it which is rare among Marinetti’s epithets of
raise.

‘ This more restrained and adult view of technology seems to have been
part of a change which was coming over Futurism as a whole, The more
abstract vision here proposed can be paralleled by the increasing abstrac-
tion of the paintings of Balla through 1912 and 1913. The tone of other
parts of the Mantfesto af Geometrical and Mechanical Splendour is dry and
tough, rather than rhetorical. This splendour is compounded of (besides the
usual Futurist ingredients like speed and the city)

... harnessed power . . . order, discipline, method . . . the aggressive optimism
that comes from physical culture and sport ... the ubiquity, laconic tone and
simultaneity that characterise tourism, big business and journalism . . . con-
ciseness . . . harmonious precision,

‘These qualities were perceived for the first time, according to Marinetti,
and their mechanical splendour, in a thoroughly Futurist place—on the
bridge of a dreadnought, but though the source of inspiration was much as
it had ever been, the qualities deduced were not those that he would have

noted in rgog. If these qualities can be categorised, they are abstract,
intellectual—and French (ordre, disctpline, méthode).

The continuous contact with Paris, never broken after 1911, and rein-
forced by the temporary absorption of the Florentine Cubist group and their
magazine La Voce, after 1g12, had undoubtedly modified Futurist sensi-
bilities. Their enthusiastic acceptance of machinery and urban life remained
untouched, but their view of the proper artistic consequences of their
social orientation had undoubtedly altered. Boccioni’s preference expressed
for straight lines (mentioned supra) probably marks the beginning of the
change, and his painting, toward the end of 1914 was becoming increasingly
Parisian, until in 1915 and 1916 (the year in which he died) he was painting,
in all but colour, imitations of Cézanne,

The Cubists had not gone untouched either. The Orphic faction of
Delaunay was largely Futurist in inspiration and the qualities attributed to
it by Apollinaire were, in fact, slightly altered quotations from Boccioni.
The Futurist magazine Lacerddé circulated in Cubist circles and appears in
two Picasso still lifes. Under pressure from Boccioni. Apoilinaire ‘turned
Futurist’ and wrote a Manifesto, LE’ Antitradition Futuriste, which was dia-
tributed as a broadside in Paris (June 1913), Futurism, oriented toward the
world of machinery and technology, and Cubism, regarded by Apollinaire
as a pure geometrical construct of the mind, were drawing very close
together, and, by the beginning of 1914 it was time to realise the mechan-
istic inspiration of Futurism in terns of the pure geometrical forms to-
wards which Parisian art was tending. The achievement was Sant’Ela’s,
and the product was Futurist architecture.

6 Lacerbd was—eflectively—La Voce modified to serve the interests of both the
Florentine group and Marinetti’s circle. This happy consummation was only
achieved at the expense of vociferous arguments, a pitched battle with café tablea
and chairs, and much backstage manoeuvring. Nevertheless, Marinetti’s view that
Italy was not big enough for two avant-gardes was accepted in the end, and the

uneasy alliance lasted till just after the beginning of the War, when it quietly fell
apart.


10: Sant’Elia and Futurist architecture

THE APPLICATION OF the term ‘Futurist’ to the opinions and designs of
Antonio Sant’Elia has been contested with legalistic enthusiasm by Italian
scholars since 1955, but only on biographical grounds, not in terms of the
ideas involved. The biographical facts! are not in doubt and may be briefly
stated. Sant’Elia was born in Como in 1888, and was thus a little younger
than the masters of the Twenties. His studies, first in Milan, and later at
the University of Bologna, were interrupted by a period of apprenticeship
to the Villoresi Canal Company, and of service in the works department
of the commune of Milan. On his return from Bologna to Milan in 1g1z he
set up as an architect, but most of his time seers to have been taken up in
work for other offices, and no buildings designed under his own name appear
to survive with any certainty.

Sartoris has stated that Sant’Elia was in touch with the Futurists fram
the time of his return, and this has not been questioned in the recent
polemics. In 1912, 1913 and 1914 he made a number (possibly several
hundred) of imaginative drawings of buildings and town-planning ideas,
and a group of these under the title of the Cutid Nuova were shown at an
exhibition of the group Nuove Tendenze in May 1914. In the catalogue of
this exhibition there appeared, over Sant’Elia’s name, a /Mfessaggio on the
problems of Modern architecture: and a reworked version of this Messaggio
appeared on the canonical eleventh day of fuly 1914, as the Manifesto of
Futurist architecture, still over the name of Sant’Elia, and without other
signatories. After the outbreak of War, Sant"Elia, like Marinetti and Boc-
cioni volunteered for the Army, even before Italy entered the fighting.
Eventually he died a hero’s death in the battle of Monfalcone in October
1916, two months after Boccioni, His name and reputation were nurtured
with unusual care by Marinetti, who, for instance, brought his work to the
attention of the Dutch de Sif group in 1917, but it is this Marinettian con~
nection that seems to have provoked the recent attempts to diminish the

1See the biographical memoir at the beginning of Alberto Sartoris's book
L’ Architetta Antonio Sant’ Elia,

importance, even to deny the existence, of Sant’Elia’s Futurist affiliations.*

The argument hinges upon the differences between the texts of the
Messaggto and the Manifesto, Neither now appears to have been actually
written by Sant’Elia himself, even the Afessaggio having been worked up,
apparently, by Ugo Nebbia from ideas expounded to him by the architect
‘alle quali perfettamente aderivo’.* If Nebbia’s word is to be trusted—and
even the anti-Marinettians appear to trust 1t—then a scrutiny of the text of
the JMfessaggio should not only give a fair view of the ideas that were
indisputably Sant’Eha’s own, but also make it possible to evaluate their
relationship ta Futurism, without any suspicion of Marinetti’s inter-
ference, such as exists with the Manifesto, The text* of the Messaggio reads
in its entirety

The problem of Modern architecture is not a problem of rearranging its lines;
not a question of finding new mouldings, new architrayves for doors and windows;
nor of replacing columns, pilasters and corbels with caryatides, hornets and
frogs: not a question of leaving a facade bare brick or facing it with stone or
plaster, in a word, it has nothing te do with defining formalistic differences be-
tween the new buildings and old ones, But to raise the new-built structure on a
sane plan, gleaning every benefit af science and technclogy, settling nobly every
demand of our habits and our spirits, rejecting all that is heavy, grotesque and
unsympathetic to us (tradition, style, nesthetics, proportion), establishing new
forms, new lines, new reasons for existence, solely out of the special conditions
of Modern living, and its projection as aesthetic value in cur sensibilities.

Such an architecture cannat be subject to any law of historical continuity. It
thust be as new as our state of mind is new, and the contingencies of our
moment in history.

The art of building has been able to evolve through time and pass from style
to style while maintaining the general character of architecture unchanged,
because in history there have been numerous changes of taste brought on by
shifts of religious conviction or the successions of political regimes, but few
eccasioned by profound changes in our conditions of life, changes that discard
or ovethaul the old conditions, as have the discovery of natural laws, the per-
fection of technical methods, the rational and scientific use of materials,

in modern life, the process of consequential stylistic development comes to a
halt. Architecture, exhausted by tradition, begins again, forcibly, from the
beginning. [continued on facing page]

* The leader in anti-Marinettian polemics has been Giovanni Bernasconi, in the
pages of Rivista Tecnica, a magazine published im Lugano of which he was editor,
He has been able to draw on the eye-witness accounts of Maric Chiattone, up till
the time of the latter’s death in 1957. The argument depends chiefiy an the niceties
of interpretation of remembered conversations, and the differences between the
texts of the Messaggio and the Manifesto (see below), It does not, however, involve
any confrontation of the ideas that were indisputably Sant’ Elia’s with those current
among the Futurists. Such a confrontation gives a different picture, as will be seen
later in the present chapter, to that put forward by those who maintaim, usually for
commendable political reasons, that Sane’Elia never was a Futurist. For the
moment, it appears thet Bernasconi has carrted his point in Italy, and his view is
accepted by, for instance, Brune Zevi and Giulia Veronesi.

*Nebbia has given his version of the writing of the Messaggi m a letter to
EL’ Espresso (Rome, 9 December 1996).

4 This is the text established by Bernasconi—to whom thanks are due, whatever
his opiniens—in Rivista Tecnica (Lugano, 1956, No. 7) and subsequently issued by
him ag a Separate pamphlet,

7

Calculations of the reaistance of materials, the use of reinforced concrete and
iron, exclude ‘Architecture’ as understood in the Classica! and traditional sense,
Modem structural materials and our scientific concepts absolutely do not Jend
themselves to the disciplines of the historical styles, and are the chief cause of
the protesque aspect of modish constructions where we see the lightness and
proud slenderness of girders, the stightness of reinforced concrete, bent to the
heavy curve of the arch, eping the stolidity of marble.

The formidable antithesis between the modern world and the old is determined
by everything that was not there to begin with. Into our lives have entered
elements whose very possibility the ancients could net have suspected; material
contingencies have crystallised, spiritual attitudes have arisen, with thousand-
fold repercussions: first, the formation of a new ideal of beauty, embryonic still
and abscure, but already stirring the masses with its fascination. We have lost
the sense of the monumental, the massive, the static, and we have enriched our
sensibilities with a taste for the light and the practical. We no longer feel cur-
selves to be the men of the cathedrals and ancient moot halls, but men of the
Grand Hotels, railway stations, giant roeds, colossal harbours, covered markets,
glittermp arcades, reconstruction areas and salutary slum clearances.

We must invent and rebuild ex novo our Moder city like an immense and
tumuliuous shipyard, active, mobile and everywhere dynamic, and the moder
building like a gigantic machine. Lifts must no longer hide away like solitary
worms in the stairwells, but the stairs—now uselegs—must be abolished, and
the lifts must swarm up the farades like serpents of glass and iron, The house
of cement, iron, and glass, without carved or painted ornament, rich only in the
inherent beauty of its lines and modelling, extraordinarily brutish in its mech-
anicel simplicity, as big as need dictates, and not merely as zoning rules permit,
must rise from the brink of a tumultuous abyss; the street which, itself, will no
longer Mie like a doormat at the level of the thresholds, but plunge storeys deep
into the earth, gathering up the traffic of the metropolis connected far necessary
transfers to metal cat-walks and high-speed conveyor belts.

For these reasons I insist that we muat abolish the monumental and the decora-
tive; that we must resolve the problem of Modern architecture without cribbing
photographs of China, Persia or Japan, nor stultifying ourselves with Vitruvian
rules, but with strokes of genus, equipped only with a scientific and technolo-
gical culture; that everything must be revolutionised; that we must exploit our
rogis and put our basements to work; depreciate the importance of facades;
transfer questions of taste out of the field of petty mouldings, fiddling capitals
and insignificant portices, into the vaster field of the grouping of masses on
the grandest scale; that [t is time to have done with funereal commemorative
architecture; that architecture must be something more vital than that, and we
can best attain that something by blowing sky-high, for a start, all those monu-
ments and monumental! pavements, atcades and flights of ateps, by diggme out
our streets and piazzas, by raising the level of the city, by reordering the earth’s
crust and reducing it to be the servant of our every need and cur every fancy.

And I conclude in disfavour of

Modish architecture of every style and nation.

Classically solemn architecture, hieratic, theatrical, decorative, monumental,
graceful or pleasing.

Preservation, reconatruction, reproduction of ancient monuments,

Perpendicular and horizontal lines, cubic end pyramidal formes, static grave,
oppressive and absclutely foreign to our newest sensibilities.

Use of materials thet are massive, bulky, durable and expensive, all opposed
to the complexity of Modern culture and Medern experience

and I affirm

That the new architecture is the architecture of cold calculation, temerious
boldness and simplicity; the architecture of reinforced concrete, iron, glass,
textile fibres. and all those replacements for wood, stone and brick that make for
the attainment in maxirnum elasticity and lightness,

That real architecture is not, for all that, an anid combination of practicality
and utility, but remains art, that is, synthesis and expression.

That decoration, as something superimposed on or attached to architecture
is an absurdity, and that only from the use and disposition of raw, naked and
violently coloured materials can derive the decorative value of a truly Modern
architecture,

And finally [ affirm that just as the ancients drew their inspiration in art from
the elements of the natural world, so we—miaterially and spiritually artifictal—
must find our inspiration in the new mechanical world we have created, of
which architecture must be the fairest expression, the fullest synthesis, the most
effective artistic integration.

By any standard of historical yudgernent this would be a remarkable docu-
ment to have been produced early in 1g14, because it puts together the
predisposing causes and the newly emergent ideas of the pre-War epoch in
a manner which did not become general until the War was over, and—
more important—it takes up attitudes to those predisposing causes accord~
ing to those new ideas. Thus, the second paragraph rejects the architecture
of the past, the third takes a view of the past that Choisy could have
approved (and probably inspired}, the fourth explains why the past must be
rejected, and the fifth explains that rejection further in terms of concepts
that derive mostly from nineteenth-century Rationalist sources, or from
the moralising tradition of England. This kind of revaluation of older
bodies of ideas, accepting much of what they had to say a3 true, but re~
casting them in new frames of reference that often completely altered their
meaning, was to become the common ground of mainstream ideas in the
Twenties—for instance, the reworking of Guadet’s idea of elementary com-
position in terms of asymmetrical planning, or the use of Choisy’s own
insistence on the importance of technique to make nonsense of his pro-
position that the technical aids available to modern architects were those
of the Gothic or even the prehistoric world.

But Sant’Elia does more than this. He anticipates, in the second of his
afhrmations, the anti-Functionalist mood of Le Corbusier and Gropius in
the Twenties, and in taking up Berlage’s view on the impropriety of adding
decoration to structure, he moves forward to a position abreast of that
adopted by Adolf Loos in Ornament und Verbrechen. That he knew Looa’s
work is entirely possible, but the possibility at once raises the problem of
the connection with Futurism. There is a distinct streak of Viennese late
Art Nouveau about some of Sant’Elia’s earliest surviving designs, such as
the project for the cemetery at Monza,® of 1912, executed in collaboration
with Italo Paternostro. But well before the compilation of the Messaggto this
quality had disappeared, replaced by a bold glyptic starkness, more ex-
treme than that of any of his contemporaries, even Poelzig, and far beyond
anything being done in Vienna by anyone except possibly Loos himself,
But there are no stylistic resemblances to Loos at all, and the indications

* A very full reprinting of Sant’Elia’s drawings and projects was undertaken by
Tenton and Mariani in LL’ Architetiura (Rome, 1995, No. z and 1956, No. 5}.


are that by the time Sant’Elia evolved this undecorated style of his own,
he was out of direct touch with Vienna—if he had ever been in touch at all.

On the other hand, Marinetti and the Futurists provided a direct line of
contact with Paris, where Georges Besson’s translation of Ornament und
Verbrechen had appeared in 1913, and with Der Sturm which had reprinted
the essay in 1912. If it is maintained that Sant’Elia was not a Futurist at
the time the Afessaggio was composed, these two links with Loos are, pre-
sumably impossible. However, in spite of the fact that the words Fudurist
and Futurion do not appear in the Messaggia, it is difficult to construe it
as anything but a work Futurist in spirit, form and inspiration. The
Futurist spirit is manifest in its rejection of the past, of Monumentality
and Classicism, its insistence on the revolutionary changes in cultural life
wrought by science and technique. It is Futurist too in the vehemence
of its opinions, and in its form, complete with positive and negative proposi-
tions at its end. Above all it contains numerous ideas, echoes and partial
quotations from existing Futurist publications.

Thus, the ‘new ideal of beauty’ connects it with the Foundation Mani-
festo of Futurism, the ‘masses’ it fascinated connect it with these ‘men of
the people’ to whom Marinetti attributed the gift of mechanical prophecy
in Le Futurtsme, The proposed new materials to replace wood, stone and
brick are directly comparable to the new materials (in some cases they are
identical) proposed by Boccioni to replace marbie and bronze in the Mani-
festo on sculpture, the insistence on dynamism is endemic in Futurist
writing, while in the final affirmation the contrast between the inspiration
of the ancients and the inspiration proper to a Modernist is simply a re-
working of Beccioni’s pronouncements on the same subjects, though with
the curious and significant modification of ‘world of religion that weighed
upon their souls’ to ‘elements of the natural world’—where Boccioni saw
the church as the inspiration of the great art of the past, Sant’Elia pre-
sumably saw tree-trunks as the inspiration of Doric, branches as the inspira-
tion of Gothic, and foliage as the inspiration of most of the ornament known
to ancient architecture.

Even so, the sentiment remains Futurist, and the document as a whole
stands too close to Futurism in every respect to be capable of consideration
under any other heading. Furthermore, the most elaborate of Sant’Elia’s
sketches of rg13 and 1914 underline the Futurist quality of his inspiration
at the time. In order of increasing complexity, rather than chronology,
these sketches begin with simple and almost abstract exercises in architec-
tonic form, tall structures titled Dinamismna Architeftontco and occasionally
piven the functional justification of lighthouses. Their shapes are bare and
smooth, rectangular or semicircular in plan, often battered back in sec-
tion to give a tapering silhouette, their vertical emphasis uninterrupted
by string-courses or cornices, but reinforced by boldly marked vertical
arrises. Though nothing designed by him in this idiom was ever built, the

monument to the War-dead (and to Sant’Elia himself) in Como was
worked up from drawings of this type by Enrico Prarnpolini and Ginseppe
Terragni,® and—allowing for the fact that Sant’Elia himself could never,
presumably, have designed a monument—gives a fair idea of the plastic
qualities he intended in these sketches.

The next order of complexity in his designs is represented by single
butldings for relatively uncomplicated functions. These include aH the
types of buildings that Marimetti had indicated in Le Futurisme: villas open
to the breeze and the horizon (and one of them visibly influenced by
Wright} large apartment houses (though the best-known designs for blocks
of flats from Sant’Ehia’s circle were by the Swiss, Mario Chiattone), great
meeting halls (sametirnes labelled theatres) and others, such as airship
hangars, bridges, factories, and power-stations. In most of these projects,
all of them presented in perspectives and very few indeed in plan, the
emphasis is on the same elements as appear in the simpler sketches—
battered walls, canted buttresses, square podia or basements, and strong
semicircular projections, either as apses, or in ranks along the side of the
building, the buttresses too being used repetitively in this way. The most
striking of all these designs are those for power-stations, which ernbrace
the most grandiose vertical rhetoric in some, an unassuming simplicity in
others, and m one, the geometrical rigour of the forms and their mode of
grouping is such that only the date 1913 under Sant’Elia’s signature and
a slight Art Nouveau border would give one to suppose that it had not been
done in the late Twenties or even the Thirties.

The most complex of all his sketches are the fragments of town-planning
schemes which were put mto fairly precise draughtsmanship, as against
his usual free-hand styte, for exhibition in May 1914. The original inspira-
tion of these projects would appear to have been the proposal to rebuild
Milan Central Station, first mooted in 1906, which involved moving it
back to its present site, thus creating (a) the broad avenue of the present
Viale Vittor Pisani and (6) the need for a traffic underpass beneath the
tracks, such as now exists. The earliest of his Central Station projects
exhibit both of these features, with the manifestly Futurist addition that
the Viale is shown decked over to provide a landing strip for aircraft be-
tween its two ranks of skyscrapers—a suicidal project which reappears,
along with a good deal more of Sant’Elia, in Le Corbusier.’

¢ Terrapni, much under Marinettian influence at the time, was awarded the first
prize in the cornpetition in 19626, but the monument wes not completed until the
early Thirties,

7 See chapter 78: it is just possible that Sant’Elia’s ideas for a multi-level city
have a Parisian source, since Gustave Kahn, who was a friend of Marinett’s for
some time before 1914, had drawn attention to the ideas of the commeunard doctor,
Tony Moilin, who propnsed streets at various levels, with railways above and
below them converging on a central railway station, a3 a cure for Paris traffic prob-

lems in the fate Eighteen-sixties. These propositions clearly anticipate the pro-
jects of both Sant’Elia and Le Corbusier, and could have influenced both.

But this particular design is conceived in loosely modelled curved masses,
unlike the precise forms of the projects of late 1913, and equally unlike the
neatly-detailed, sharp-arrised forms of the Central Station as it appeared
redrawn in 1914. These carefully rendered presentation drawings, are
united both in style of draughtsmanship, and the style of the buildings
they represent, with the rest of the Citta Nuova series that were exhibited
with them, and Sant’Elia’s version of Milan in the year 2,000, though
fragmentary, is held together by a basic unity of style, and—even more
important—a basic unity of vision. Sant'Elia sees his city as based in a
complex network of transport services, in some drawings as much as seven
jevels deep, much as he had proposed in his observations on streets in the
Manifesto. Out of this three-dimensional prid of communications rise the
buildings, usually a gradinate, that is, with the floors stepped back one
behind the other towards the top. The floors are of equal, or even increasing
depth from back to frent, however, and the overhangs at the back are taken
up by the rising curve of a parabolic arch whose other half supports the
back of the buiiding’s twin, which is backed up against it, leaving a tunnel
for transport and services between them.® The lift-shafts are on the facades,
and, rising vertically, stand well clear of the upper floors, to which they
are connected by bridges of ever-increasing length as one goes up. This
device, which fulfils, again, a proposition in the Messaggio, was probably
suggested to him by the lifts on the shores of Lake Como rising from
landing stages, and connected back to points on the mountainside by
bridges.

He appears to bave envisaged his city as consisting of knots of building
of this type, connected by the network of multi-level circulation at their
feet. The resermbiance to Boccioni’s ‘field’ concept of space, with bodies
connected by geometrical fields of force is very striking, as is the reappear-
ance of purely superficial Boccionisms Like the Ulumimated advertising
that appears on the roof of some of these projects. Yet in this minor device
of designing the advertising as part of the building, he was a pioneer of
later developments, as much as he was in his fully three-dimensional view
of town-planning problems. On both counts, the comparison with Tony
Garnier is instructive. Garnier has skyline advertising over the principal
hotel of his Cité Industrielie but it looks like an afterthought attached to 2
broadly Classical design, even though he was probably the first architect
to recognise that such advertising had its place. Similarly, in spite of the
fact that he was also the first architect to recognise that the planning of
industrial towns had its special problems, his conclusions, though published

® Some of the drawings are apparently inscribed Mfilgna zo00,

* This type of structure was actually used, a decade later by Henri Sauvage for
his flats in the Rue des Amiraux, Paris; see chapter 16. Although the street facades
of these flats were very Sant’ Elian, with gradinate and vertical towers standing

away from them, the arched construction at the back was used only to span a
swimming pocl and garages, not a service road,

later than Sant’Elia’s, are less radical, less well integrated, and were to
prove less influential, even though lip-service was often paid to them.

After 1918 it was to be the Sant’Elian concept of the multi-level tower
city that held sway in men’s imaginations, and the wide distribution of his
ideas on the subject seems to have been almost entirely due to the energetic
promotion of Sant’Elia’s memory by Marinetti. It is fair to say that his
reputation is largely of Marinetti’s making, outside Italy at least, not only
because Marinetti circulated his work to groups like de Stil and Der Sturm,
but also because some of the most widely admired opinions associated with
his name are only to be found in the disputed Manifesto, not in the
iMessaggio, which hardly anyone outside Italy ever saw,

It is generally agreed that the Manifesto is largely Marinetti’s responsi-
bility, but there is still some confusion about how much he actually wrote.
The differences between the two texts are of two kinds.!° Firstly, alterations,
which consist mostly of inserting the words Futurist or Futurism on the
slightest pretext, and leaving the Messaggia otherwise almost untouched,
and secondly, the addition of new paragraphs at the head of the text, and
among the propositions at the end. The authorship of the four new para-
graphs at the head is obscure; they do not read like Marinetti, and Sant’
Elia's reported objections to the text of the Manifesto were to the additions
at the end, not those at the beginning, ‘They do not, in fact, add much to
the argument, and their flavour can be adequately typified by the first

Since the eighteenth century there has been no architecture at all, A bewildering

mix-up of the most varied elements of atyle, ermployed in masking the skeletons

of Modern buildings is called Moder architecture, The new beauty of steel and
concrete is being profaned by the superimposition of carnival-style decorative
incrustations justified neither by antiquity of the constructional methods nor
by our own tastes, drawing their sources from ancient Egypt, India and

Byzantium...
and so forth, mostly a rhetorical expansion of the sentiments of the body
of the Messaggio, with even stronger echoes of Loos.

However, the additions at the end are more to the point, the first of them
now reading, after ‘I combat and despise’

All avant-garde pseudo-architecture from Austria, Hungary, Germany and

erica
which is simply Marinettian politics and makes his hand very clear in this
last part. The next three negative propositions are virtually unchanged, the
fifth has been dropped. The first two positive propositions are unchanged
apart from the insertion of Futurist instead of mew: the third proposition has
been dismissed to fourth to make way for a new one reading

That oblique and eiliptical Lmes are dynamic by their very nature, have an
emotive power a thousand times greater than that of horizontals and verticala,
and there can be no dynamically integrated architecture without them,

1% The most reliable text of the Manifesto is in Sartoris’s book mentioned above,

er et

It is difficult to see how Sant’Elia could have disagreed with this since it
is a logical extension of his own disapproval of cubic forms, etc. He had
no need to disapprove of the next two since they were his own unaltered,
except for the usual insertion of the word Futurist for new, but he might
conceivably have objected to the last three, all added, though his status
a3 a pioneer and prophet of the Twenties would be slightly diminished
thereby, since these, apart from the patent ‘advertisement’ in the last
paragraph, contain the most forward-looking ideas to which his name haa
ever been attached, viz,

That architecture as the art of disposing the forms of a building according to

pre-established laws is finished.

That architecture must be understood as the power freely and boldly to har-

monise environment and man, that is, to render the worid of things a projection

of the world of the spirit.

That from an architecture so conceived ne stock answers, plastic er linear,

could arise, because the fundamental characteristics of Futurist architecture

will be expendability and transience. Qur houses will last less time than we do,
and every generation will have to make its own, This constant renewal of the
architectonic environment will contribute to the victory of Futurism, already
asserting itself through fe mots en Hberté, plastic dynamism, music withaut
bars, the art of poise, through alt of which we fight without quarter against
passéiste cowardice.

Since the idea that every generation must make its own house is by far the

best known to which Sant’Elia’s name attaches, it appears that his inter-

national reputation is indeed of Marinetti’s making.

Whether or not he was a Futurist, the possibility of a Futurist architec-
ture perished with Sant’Elia in 1916 just as the development of Futurist
painting expired, for certain, with the death of Boccioni in the same year.
The most interesting sketches made by Mario Chiattone, Sant’Elia’s
fellow architect in the Nuoce Tendenze group, all seem to have been made
before the middle of the War, in spite of the fact that he lived until 1957.
After 1918, Virgilio Marchi, one of the ‘Bar Bragaglia’ circle of Roman
Futurists converted some Roman remains in the Via Avignonesi into the
aforementioned Bar, and an experimental theatre! a piece of restoration
that shows how far Marchi had receded from the pasition adopted by Sant’
Elia, even while paying lip-service to his name. The recession is under-
acored by the merely modish style of this work, and further underlined by
the text and illustrations of a small bock on Architettura Futurista that
March: published about this time. The sketches have some affinities with
the work of such Berlin Expressionists as Otto Bartning, but without his
structural sense, and achieve their nadir in a project for the ‘adaptation of
an existing structure to Futurism’—a piece of applied decoration that would
have appalled Sant’Elia, spread over a raw concrete skeleton that he would
have admired.

But Marchi’s inanities are only typical of the downfall of the movement
#2 Both are illustrated in his book Architetiura Futurista (Foligno, 1923).

as a whole. Robbed of its most active and substantia! members by deaths
and resignations, robbed of relevance by a world that had been rendered
forcibly Futurist by the War, robbed of independence of manoeuvre by too
close an invelvement with the Fascist revolution, it had become an object
of ridicule, Only Marinettt and Balla survived of the old brigade, the ten
years they had given themselves to achieve their aims having expired in
Igtg. Yet they had, in fact, achieved most of their aims, The bulk of their
irredentist claims had been satisfied, barring Trieste; parliamentary govern-
ment had been ridiculed and overthrown; the cornic-opera politics and
back-stage barbarities of the Fascist régime were, so to speak, part of the
original specification for a virile and bellicose Italy, Though the official
eyes of that Italy were fixed too often on the Roman past, rather than the
Milanese future, the Futurists’ small place in the hierarchy did help to
make progressive architecture possible, and even produce some patronage
for it, in the Twenties and Thirties—Terragni’s work in and around
Como being to some extent a conscious assumption of the mantle of Sant’
Elia, but couched in the established idiom of the International Style that
had been created in other countries.

Yet it was in those other countries that the Futurists had most fully
achieved their aims. As Marinetti sank deeper into political buffoonery,
the ideas that he and his circle had propagated before 1914 became more
and more part of the inalienable common ground of mainstream develop-
ments in Modern architecture as subsequent chapters will show, The
growing pressure of mechanisation made the world seem more and more
Futurist, and as men feit this increasing pressure, they found Futurist ideas
at hand to channel their ideas and give shape to their expression. The
general availability of such ideas should occasion no surprise in view of the
work that Marinetti had put into their distribution across Europe from
Madrid to Moscow, from Rome to Berlin. His own travels, and those of
Boccion: (theugh less extensive) were supported and extended by Futurist
manifestations in Paris (1g1z, 1913, 1914), London (1912-13), Rotterdam
and Beriin (both in 1913) while all or part of the exhibition held in Paris in
1912 seems to have been seen in Brussels, Berlin, Hamburg, The Hague,
Leipzig, Munich, Vienna, Breslau, Wiesbaden, Zurich and Dresden, and
in every case was accompanied by Manifestoes, some of which were available
in German, Spanish and Russian by 1914, as well as the ‘original’ French
and Italian. Independent local Manifestoes were also issued by Futurist
groups in Madrid and London,

In most of these places, as in London, where the group soon fell apart,#
interest in Futurism as a movement was short-lived, but the influence Hived

44The group in London seems to have existed chiefly in the minds of Marinetti,
Nevinson and, briely, Wyndham Lewis. Among those who hastened to disclaim
membership waz Frederick Etchells, who later translated two of Le Corbusier's
bocks inte English, and designed the first Modern office block in London, Craw-
fords in High Hoiborn.

on, in manifestations as diverse as Dadaist typography, the rise of kinetic
sculpture, the poetry of Mayakovsky—and the theoretical writing that sup-
ported progressive architecture all over Europe. In most cases this was
due to the tapping of a common deposit of ideas, without direct inter-
vention from any of the surviving Futurists themselves, but in the case of
de Siijl, to which we must turn next, what might be termed ‘sub-conscious
Futurism’ was supplemented and made conscious by the despatch of docu-
ments from Marinetti in 1917, among them some reproductions of Sant’
Elia’s drawings, and the text of the Manifesto of Futurist Architecture.

Section three

HOLLAND: THE LEGACY OF BERLAGE: DE STIJL, 1917-1925

Berlage, H. P: Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur, Berlin, 1908.
Gedanken iiber Stil, Leipzig, 1905.
de Groot, J. H: Vormhkarmonie, Amsterdam, 1912.
Wright, F. Ll: Introduction to the ‘first Wasmuth volume’:
Frank Lloyd Wright, Ausgeftihrte Bauten und Enteoiirfe,
Berlin, 1930.
Ashbee, C. R: Introduction to the ‘second Wasmuth volume’:
Frank Lloyd Wright (Chicago), Berlin, 1911.
de Fries, H: Frank Lloyd Wright, Berlin, 1926.
Jaffe, H. L. C: de Sti? r917~1927, Amsterdam, 1956.
Brown, Theodore M: The Work of G. Rietveld, Architect, Utrecht, 1958.
Seuphor, M: Pret Mfondriaan, London, 1957.
Oud, J. J. P: Holldndische Architektur (Bauhausbuch ro), Munich, 1926.
Mendelsohn, E: lectures reprinted in
Erich Mendelsohn, Das Gesamischaffen des Architekten,
Berlin, 193°.
Whittick, A: Eric Mendelsohn, London (2nd edn.}, 1956.
Conrads and Sperlich: Fantastic Architecture (English version with notes
by G. and C, C, Collins}, London, 1962.
Malevitsch, K: Die gegenstandslase Welt { Bauhausbuch 17), Munich, 1927.
Lissitsky, E: Russtand, Vienna, 1930.
Periodicals
Wendingen, 1919-1925
(including special issues on Mendelsohn, 1920, and Frank Lloyd
Wright, 1925.)
de Styl, 1917-1931,
Gand ABC, 1923-1925.

11: Holland: Berlage and attitudes to Wright

DURING THE WAR of 1914-18 the Dutch alone, of all nations who had
contributed to the growth of a new architecture, enjoyed the benefits of
neutrality, and in the development of their architecture alone can the break
between the first and second phase of the developing twentieth-century
style be seen unobstructed by the confusions of the War. Outside Helland,
major architects whose careers effectively span the War years are rare—
Gropius and Perret are almost alone in having done work of equal interest
before 1914 and after 1918—end most of the personalities who charac-
terised the post-War scene, such as Mendelsohn, Mies van der Rohe, Le
Corbusier, Lurcat, have insignificant or non-existent pre-War careers. But
in Holland the war years were, if anything, a period of increased building
activity, forcing on the development of talents that were maturing after
1910, which rapidly brought young men to the top, and drove pre-War
currents of ideas to their logical (or illogical) conclusions—all without any
serious breaks or interruptions of development except those precipitated
by the ideas and personalities involved. ‘The break—and it is a real break
with the past—comes in late 1917 with the foundation of the group de
Sil, but the ideas of this group, far from being born of the agonising ex-
perences of the War, were the product of discussions, experiments and
building work that had been going on since 1911, or thereabouts. That the
ideas of de Sti! (and simular bodies of thought) were taken up so enthusias-
tically in countries that had been involved in the War, seems to be less due
to their applicability to post-War conditions (which ts doubtful) than to the
fact that theorists in most of those countries would have arrived at similar
conclusions themselves at about the same time, had they not been other-
wise engaged.

The rapid evolution of de Stijl theory and practice may be largely attri-
buted to the clear-cut polemical situation in which the group's architects
found themselves, with their own Rationalist, mechanistic, abstract
approach in direct opposition te the fantasticated, handicraft, figurative
approach of the Wendingen group in Amsterdam. But, as is so often the
case in polemics of this kind, the violent opponents had a great deal in

common—in this case the example of H. P. Berlage, and his advocacy of
F. Lloyd Wright.

Hendrikus Peter Berlage was born as far back as 1856; he studied in
Zurich in the late Seventies and did not return to Holland until after 1881.
His studies had brought him into contact with late followers of Gottfried
Semper! while, after his return to Holland, he was associated with P. J. H.
Cupers, an admirer and—to some extent—follower of Viollet-le-Duc.
From these two sources, Berlage seems to have acquired the strain of care-
ful mid-nineteenth Rationalism that runs through his work and his
writings. But since his most netable building, the Beurs in Amsterdam,
was not completed until after 1900, and his most influential writings all
date from after 1905, young Dutch architects confused by the collapse of
Art Nouveau were able to turn to the works and writings of a man who con-
ceived of architecture in terms that had been current before Art Nouveau
appeared on the scene.

‘This is net to say that Berlage did not take cognisance of technical and
social developments of his own time; to him, as te any true Rationalist,
these were of prime importance, but the way in which he regards them 1s
unlike the attitude of most of the other architectural theorists of his time.
In particular one notes in his writings a moralistic tone of voice about the
right employment of materials, etc. that is very hard to parallel, but gave
his views particular force wherever they were heard. In general he seems to
have been understood, and regarded, in the sense that he himself would
have preferred to be understood and regarded, as a man who insisted on
certain elementary truths, and despised side issues and decorative irrele-
vancies.

The truths on which he insisted were three: the primacy of space, the
importance of walls as creators of form, and the need for systematic pro-
portion. As he expresses them, the first two are inseparably linked. In his
Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur of 1908? he relates therm thus

The art of the master-builder lies in this: the creation of space, not the sketching
of fagades. A spatial envelope is established by means of walls, whereby a space,
or a series of spaces is manifested, according to the complexity of the walling.

In view of the brilliant plays upon space later created by his indirect
follower G. T. Rietveld and his direct pupil Mies van der Rohe,’ it is worth
noting here that the kind of space that Berlage appears to have in mind is
interior space within the building envelope, not space as an extensive

' Notably Manfred Semper, old Gottfried’s son, and others of that generation
of Sernpers.

? Like nearly everything else that he wrote at the period, this was a reprint of
lectures given in German to German audiences.

*In Rietveld’s case, the Schréder house at Utrecht, discussed in chapter 14,
and in Mies’s case, most notably the project for a brick villa described in chapter

ig,

continuum, just as the walling he has in mind is load-bearing and solidly
built of brick or masonry. These were both reasonably conventional ideas
for the period, but waliing, in particular, had for him a more than cus-
tomary value. In his German texts he persistently speaks of /AZauern and
Mauerfldchen, emphasising the wall’s substantial qualities; and he insists,
at the end of his Gedanken tiber Stil

Before all else the wall must be shown naked in all its sleek beauty, and any-
thing fixed on to it must be shunned as an embarrassment

and in the Grundlagen

And thus walling would receive its due value again, in the sense that its nature
as a plane would remain, while a more heavily articulated surface would not
register as wall.

Like Adolf Loos after him, he takes as an example of good uncluttered
structure, the astylar walling of Roman remains, and in the same year as
Loos’s Ornament and Crime he wrote

And thus in architecture, decoration and ornament are quite inessential while
space-creation and the relationships of masses are its true essentials.

It is not surprising that he was largely remembered as an apostle of ‘Truth
to Materials’, but he himself would have seen beth this, and space-
creation, as subservient to overriding claims of proportional systems, to
which the bulk of his work is devoted. Proportional systems were a pre-
occupation of many of his Amsterdam contemporaries as weil, and most of
them are agreed that the originator of this preoccupation was Jan Hessel
de Groot. Berlage himself is quite explicit on his debt to him.

The main thing is to work systematically, which may yield remarkable results
for the modern theory of proportions; 1 myself have worked for years in no
other way, and I am an ex-pupil of de Groot.*

However complex the mathematics and the forms employed may have been,
de Groot’s view of the nature and function of proportion was remarkably
simple. In the introduction to one of his numerous published books and
papers, the Vormharmonie of 1912, he states

This is a book of instructions on how to arrive at harmony of farm through
forma! relationships. I call form harmonious when its internal relationships are
such that it creates a whole, The sim of my research its this; to be able to make
from, say, twenty forms, one form. Take ten letters, you can make a whole of
them through placing them next to one another sa that they can be read as a
whole, without mterruption, as a word,

However, he raises the subject to something more like the mystical plane
on which it is customarily discussed, by adding a footnote that introduces

* Quoted by Slebos as an intreduction to his Grondsiagen voor Aesthetischen
Stal which appeared in Amsterdam in 1939, a last pathetic rearguard of the
mathematical aesthetics of the Amsterdam Schoal.

Berlage’s favourite phrase (expressing an idea as old as Aristotle) for for-
mal harmony, which, he says,

...i3 also defined as ‘Unity in Plurality’ (Henhetd i: veelheid).
Berlage was not alone in following de Groot, as has been said, nor was he
alone in distributing his influence outside Holland. It is clear that the con-
tribution of J. G. Lauwericks is of great importance in this respect, for,
although he was an Amsterdam architect to begin with, he taught for some
years at the Diisseldorf Aunstgewerbeschule, where Adolf Meyer, later a
regular collaborator with Gropius, came under his influence, and he may
also have provided Le Corbusier with his first sight of a building designed
according to systematic proportion.’ But whatever Lauwerickx’s contri-
bution as a teacher on the practical plane, and whatever may have been
written by de Groot himself, and later by his follower Slebos, it was Ber-
lage who gave this school of thought its most eloquent expression, and,
although most of his ideas went by default in the work of his followers,
they did provide the foundations for a Rational attitude to form,

For Berlage, proportion was a guard against mere passing fashions, a
guarantee of permanent value, and he quotes at the head of the Grundlagen
a phrase from Sheraton’s Cabinet Maker:

Time alters fashions ... but that which is founded on geometry and real
science will remain unalterable.

He reinforces this opinion with his own experience

I have been driven to this conclusion; namely, that geometry (and thus mathe-
matical science} is not only of the greatest usefulness in the creation of artistic
form, but even of absolute necessity

he makes the customary appeal to the musical analogy

Why should architecture—of all arts most often compared to music, as Schlegel
brought out with his famous expression gefrorene Musth—why should architec-
ture be cornposed without rhythmical, te. geometrical laws,

and the equally customary appeal to the authority of Greece, by way of a
quotation from Ferguson’s History

The system of definite proporaens which the Greeks employed in the design
of their temples, was a cause of the effect they produce even on uneducated

minds.
This, however, is the only reference he makes to the supposed physiological

* Drawings signed by Meyer are reproduced in Berlage’s Grundlagen as examples
of the work being done at Diisseldorf, under Lauwerickx’s instruction, but along
purely Berlapizn lines, As regards Le Corbusier the evidence is only circum-
stantial, but conclusive. In his Mfoduloy (London edition, 1954) he relates that ‘look-
ing over a modern villa at Bremen, the gardener there had said to him (i.e. Le
Corbusier) “This stuff, you see, that’s complicated, all these twiddly bits, curves,
angles, calculations, it’s all very learned”. The villa belonged to someone called
Thorn Brick (7) a Dutehrnan, {about r909).’ The inference seems unavoidable that
the answer to the parenthetical question mark ie the Dutch artist J, Thorn Prikker,
and that this was the house built for him in Bremen by Lauwerickx in 1905—and
one wonders if it can have been Berlage who directed Le Corbusier's attention to it.

— = —_

responses to proportional effects, probably because the production of such
effects was not with him the aim of proportional systems. The aim of all
artistic creation, in his mind, was the achievement of repase, and thus of
style, the ultimate aesthetic quahty
... one leading and essential property strikes the eye; it 1s Repase—a charming
repose in small work, a noble calm in great monumental architecture. Against
this (i.e. ancient architecture) aur current work gives the impression of being
very unrestfut, I might almost say that the two words “Style’ and ‘Repose’ are
synonymous! that, at Repose equals Style, so Style equals Repose.
and later he equates these two concepts with proportion as well, by bring-
ing in the characteristic Eenhetd in Veetheid tag

Nature is not unrestful, since it has Style, and if we direct our attention to the
arts of earlier times, we shall net be misled by them either, since they have
Sryle, i.e, Unity in Plurality
The possession of style seems to have been held by most of Berlage’s
Amsterdam associates as a quality to be cultivated; they must have acquired
the idea from readings in Semper, whose Der Stil in den technischen
Kiinsten, is familiarly referred to by de Groot simply as Der Sul, and passed
it on to the group which, consciously or otherwise, took on the phrase de
Styl as both name and watchword. Just what style meant to de Groot him-
self 1s obscured by his own tendency to overfine discrimination, but he
seems, at least, not to intend the ‘catalogue styles’ of the academies. Berlage,
without ever attempting to define what style really is, nevertheless, clearly
means something of use and value to his own time, He decries Ruskin and
other ‘philosophers’ for being only students, not teachers, of style and says
There are, however, great practising artists like Viollet-le-Duc in France, and
the well-known Semper in Germany, wha are better teachers, and give in their
great bocks 2 practical aesthetic... of a sort that can be used,
What then is the problem?
Why, to have {a) style again.
But style is also order, and not necessarily an obvious order such as is given
by axial planning. Order prevails wherever settled laws are effective, and for
examples of this he turns once more to the Antique, and to Nature. The
order of nature raises another problem, which seems never to have been
far from his mind, but which he poses here by means of a quotation from
Semper; the problem of Norms or Types
Just as mature is ever thofty of motifs even in her endless abundance, con-
stantly repeating her basic forms, but modifying them a thousand different ways
according to the condition of her creatures and their mode of life, stretching or
curtailing some, hiding or revealing others—just as nature has her evolutionary
processes, within whose lirmits old motifs continually reappear in new creations,
so art lies within the scope of a few Norms or Types that derive from old
tradition, each constantly reappearing in diverse forms, each with its own his-

tory, as in Nature. Nothing, therefore ig purely arbitrary, but all is governed
by circumstance and relationship,

This was published in Berlin three years before Muthesius delivered 1¥’o

stehen wir? to the Werkbund Congress of 1911, and though one doubts
that Muthesius needed Berjage to remind him of Semper’s writings, never-
theless the two men knew one another and one another's ideas, which
appreach fairly closely in content, though with significant differences in
bias. As far as the architect’s task in the twentieth century is concerned,
there are striking resemblances. Berlage writes as early as rgo5
Architecture shall be the creative art of the twentieth century, as it was down to
6oo years ago, and painting and sculpture shall advance together as its servanta
and, in that employment, could reach their highest development.
and thus far he is close to Muthesius’s vision of an unified hegemony of the
arts under architecture. But he then goes on to prophesy, as a consequence
of this and

_ on the basis of present social and artistic evolution: One will soon observe
an interest in the growing body of useful arts, and a yearly decrease in the num-
ber of easel paintings and statues.

This, whatever its debts to William Morris, goes beyond anything Muthe-~
sius had prophesied, but for all that Berlage sets his sights on a very similar
target.

A drive toward Unity in Plurality is taking command of things in general,
a drive toward Order, toward Style. . . The designer of today stands before an
inviting prospect of artistic heautification, Le. to pioneer the great architectural
style of every future community. There is no fairer task.
Close as this may be ta Muthesius, there are notable differences of
approach. Berlage does not postulate any pressure of patriotic sentiment
nor economic duress—these things are to happen because they are right,
not because they are the price of survival. Further, there is no talk of
Durchgetstigung, of spiritualisation, but rather, of socialisation (this seems
to be another instance of the pre-Art Nouveau quality in Berlage’s thought;
his politics were of the left, and almost Positivist at times),
As our new concept manifests itself, what spiritual tdea shall serve as its founda-
tion? Who can answer this? Christianity is dead, and only the preliminary
stirrings can yet be felt of a new world-concept based upon the consequences of
scientific progress, We need an ethical settlement, and in that connection there
comes to the surface of the ferment of our times the question of Altruism, It
comes to this—the individual or the Community? With the denial of traditional
morality shall the individual alone be served, or, given the principle of equality,
shall ail?
Muthesius and Berlage agree on the supremacy of the community, but the
latter has not the former’s authoritarian streak, and for him the balance
of individual and community was still to be settled. Nevertheless, he was
in no doubt in which way things would go, he did his best work for com-
munal patrons, and such work was the necessary end-product for him of
his theories, which clearly envisage the architect as involved in society.
If one sets out those theories in short form—to manipulate space with
walls within an order that gives a style proper to an emergent, irreligious

society, one sees that this formula is also the one by which Berlage evaluated
the work of Frank Lioyd Wright. He came upon Wright’s work apparently
unprepared in 1911, although the first Wasmuth volume had appeared in
the previous year, and he was thus the third significant European theorist te
discover Wright for himself. He had been preceded by Professor Kuno
Francke, inspirer of the first Wasmuth volume, in 1go0g; and by C. R.
Ashbee, who wrote the introduction to the second Wasmuth volume, and
had visited Wright as early as 1901. The effect of the buildings he saw, and
such Wright texts as he seems to have read, must have been to convince him
that in Wright he saw a reflection of his own ideals. The sense of repose
that he felt in the Martin House, was confirmed by Wright’s statement that
Simplicity and repose ate the qualities that measure the true value of any work
of art
and his admiration for Wright's straightforward use of walling by the
Wrightian claim that

The Wall was let alone from base to cornice or eaves,

As a result, the lecture he gave to the Zurich Ingenieur- und Archttekien-
vereiz, in March 1gi2, on his American experiences, pays due tribute to
Richardson and Sullivan, but is dominated by Wright. In particular the
Larkm Building excited his admiration, which should net occasion surprise
since it has a good deal in common with his own Beurs. Internally both
have large hails surrounded by galleries, executed largely in brick as in-
ternal facing, with an alternative material at points of structural importance
—stone for the columns and the springing of the arches in his own work,
reinforced concrete for the gallery floor slabs in Wright’s, both serve group-
functions, but Wright's had the advantage of being designed around the open
office, which was new to Berlage, and, indeed, a recent emergent in Ameri-
can commercial organisation, rather than the time honoured business of the
Stock Exchange, which was probably slightly suspect to Berlage’s socialist
mind, The outcome is one of the most generous and disinterested tributes
paid by one architect to another in this century:¢

The building encloses only a single space, since, in accordance with the modern
American concept, an office is not divided up into separate compartments,
The boss sits at the same desk as his private secretary, whence he can supervise the
great space in its entirety and the various open stories disposed as galleries
around the central hall,

It is @ brick structure, 2nd looks from the outside like a warehouse. Yet the in-
terior is admirably illuminated, in spite of the corner stair-towers, like those of
a church, which are lit from within. The galleries are illuminated by windows
between the powerful pillars... .

* All these opinions of Berlage about Wright are taken from the lecture he gave on
his American experiences in Zurich. The text of the relevant parts of this taik is
given in H. de Fries, Frank Liovd Wright (Berlin, 1926} and all the quotations from
Wright that support them are from his article, which is discussed later in the
chapter, In the Cause of Architecture.

Brickwork is the material of the interior as well, giving place to concrete for
the floorslabs, The detailing naturally follows Wright's own unique style, and
gives a wholly exceptional testimony of his original powers,

I came away with the conviction that I had seen a truly modern building, and
filled with respect for a master who could create such a4 work, whose equal is yet
to be found in Europe.

This was Wright seen as an ideal Berlagian architect, and this lecture and
its subsequent reprinting was for many the most convincing intimation of
Wright’s qualities. But Berlage’s own followers regarded Wright in a
manner that Berlage’s writings do not warrant. For them, after 1917, the
Robie House outranked the Larkin Building as the prime example of Wright
at his most masterly, and J. J. P. Oud speaks of it in the following terms

All the parts of this building, including the furnishings, were developed along
mechanistic lines?

and Jan Wils took this valuation of Wright even farther®

People laughed at the Futurists, who want to demolish tradition and turn every-
thing upside down.

They brushed off Marinetti as a tunatic, because he wanted to burn down
Venice and rebuild it properly again.

And they shrugged up their shoulders when Wright said that the first tesk of
the machine was to render all old work obsolete,

This asstmilation of Wright to the Futurists is, in part, a mark of the
generally syncretic trend of de Stil, to which both Oud and Wils belonged
for a time, but it is equally a testimony of the peculiar way in which
Wright became known to the younger generation in Europe.

This emphasis on the mechanistic content of his work and theories might
be supposed to stem from his lecture on The Art and Craft of the Machine,
of 1g01, but the text of this seems hardly to have been known in Europe
before 1914, Instead, the answer seems to lie with two other documents:
one was the essay i the Cause of Architecture, which Wright composed in
190%, and which was published with lavish iMustrations in the Architectural
Record; the other, which contained extensive quotations from Ja the Cause,
waa C. R, Ashbee’s introduction to the second Wasmuth volume. The first
Wasmuth volume was an édition de fuxe of plans and rendered perspectives,
large in format, unhandy to use, and-expensive, ‘The second was smaller,
illustrated with photographs, and seems to have been much more
influential. Like the reprint of Berlage’s lecture, it did not go outside the
canon of photographic illustrations established by J the Cause, so that,
in spite of its late date it had no picture of the Robie House, which re-
mained unknown and unappreciated except to those who had the patience
to decipher its exciting features from the very uninformative illustrations in
the first Wasmuth volume, or those, like Rob van t’Hoff, who had seen it
with their own eyes. As a result, European ideas of Wright seem to have

*In de Stiyji, Vol. 1, p. ar. "In Wendingen, Vol. IV, p. 14.

been dominated at first by the Larkin Building and Unity Temple, the
Coonley, Dana and Martin Houses.

Yet it is clear that, after 1917, the Robie House is the most admired and
most imitated of Wright’s buildings, and the reason for this seems to be
that it, alone, with its bold forms and spectacular cantilevers, could give
body to the image of Wright as a machine architect that Ashbee had built
up in the second Wasmuth volume. This image of Wright was not acci-
dental, and Ashbee ts quite clear about his own intentions

It is quite ntentignal that I do not dilate on the subject of Frank Lloyd Wright's

interior architecture, for this does not appear to me to be the core of his crea-

tivity, nor is it really typical of him. ‘To repeat it again, one recognises in his

architecture the struggle for mastery of the machine, and that is the true pro-

vince of his powers.
This view he supports with suitably mechanistic quotations from in the
Cause and directs attention to it by acknowledging their source, Fourteen
years later, when the Wendingen group published their album of Frank
Lloyd Wright,® Jn the Cause (and two rather uninteresting pendants to it)
was the only text by Wright himself that they reprinted. Thus the Wright
that the young followers of Berlage knew was not the Wright of the verna-
cular and nature-worshipping mood of the introduction to the first Was-
muth volume (whom members of de Stji would have despised, as will
become apparent) but the Wright of

Above all, integrity. The machine is the norma! teol of our civilisation, give it

work that it can do well; nothing is of greater importance. T’o do this will be to
formulate new industrial ideals, sadly needed.

and

The machine ia here to stay. It is the forerunner of the democracy that is our
dearest hope. There is no more important tesk before the architect than to use
this normal toct to the best advantage.

or

‘The old structural forms, which up to the present time have been called archi-
tecture, are decayed. Their life went from them long age and new conditions
industrially, steel and concrete, and terracotta in particular, are prophesying
amore plastic art.
This is Wright comparable to the Futurists, and there was also Wright com-
parable to Berlage, who was equally comparable to Muthesius on occa-
sions. The Wright/Berlage relationship filled in a gap in a spectrum of
architectural ideas that ran from the Futurists at one extreme to the
Rationalists and Academics at the other, and once that gap was filled the
way was clear for the evolution of the syncretic aesthetic doctrmes of de
Styl, in which elements of almost every corpus of pre-War theory are
present.

‘ A special volume, outside the regular series, issued in 1925.

42: De Stijl: the Dutch phase

DE STIJi WAS one of two movements in Holland whose architecture was
derived in part, at least, from the work or ideas of Berlage. The other
movement, Wendingen or the Amsterdam School, was the more indebted to
his actual work, which tt evolved into a fantasticated handicrait style,
eclectic rather than inventive, inclusive not exclusive in its attitude to
forms and materials. De Stij/, on the other hand, was more indebted to his
theories or, it might be better to say, his attitudes of mind, and set out to
be Rationalist and disciplined, exclusive not inclusive, preferring a limited
range of materials, forms and structural methods.

It is common practice to link the names of the two towns Retterdam and
Amsterdam to these twe schools of thought, as if they were produced by
some special local character of the citizens, but neither tendency is par-
ticularly localised as far as the distribution of its important monuments is
concerned, and de Siii might equally weli be coupled with Utrecht on that
score. What seems more relevant, is a discrimination based on matters of
date—J. J. P. Oud, the dominating architectural figure of the early phase
of de Siji, was not born until 1890, and his earliest characteristic work, the
rest-home de Vonk at Noordwijkerhout, was buiit in 1917, whereas Michel
de Klerk, the equivalent figure in Amsterdam, was bern as early as 1884,
with his earliest characteristic work, the Hiiehwis, built in 1g11. This
interyal of six years seems to have been crucial: it meant that Oud’s style
matured, as will be seen Jater in this chapter, under the influence of Cubist
and Futurist art, while de Klerk’s matured in the long twilight of Dutch
Art Nouveau,

However, in spite of this strict primacy of date, Wendingen (which was
rather long-lived as twentieth-century movements po} did not become of
international importance until the very beginning of the Twenties, when it
established a short-lived liaison with Berlin Expressionists, and it is there-
fore proposed to deal first with the early phase of de Styl, then with
Wendingen and its international connections, and lastly with de Styi’s par-
ticipation in the international Abstract Art Movement that over-ran all
Expressionist tendencies after 1922.

For the purposes of this study it is proposed to divide the activities of de
Spl at 1921.4 The exact date of such a division must always be arbitrary,
because the change in the movement's character occupied more than twelve
months, but the choice of date seems justified firstly, by the change in the
format of the magazine de Sri in that year, frem a tall pocket-magazine
format to a wide one better adapted to displayed features and large repro-
ductions of works of art; and secondly by a wave of resignations of Dutch
members of the group, which reached its peak in that year also; eight of the
original ten members had disappeared by the end of the year.

The movement had never, in any case, been a close-knit fighting unit
like Futurism; many of its members never met one another, and it seems
that all they had in common was the acquaintance of van Doesburg, and,
in most cases, a profound respect and liking for the painter Piet Mondriaan,
The introduction to the first issue of the magazine (October 1g17) can be
read in a double sense.

Vhe object of this magazine will be to contribute to the development of a new
consciousness of beauty, It aims to make modern man receptive to the new in
creative art. Et will opoose archaistic confusion—'Modern Baroque’—with the
logical principles af a maturing style based on purer relationships with the spirit
of our times and our means of expression, It will brig together present-day
currents of thought about new creative activities—currents of thought that have
developed independently though similar in essence. .
Although this was meant to be taken as the conflation of various ‘-isms’
on an international scale, the fact remains that most of de Styl’s early
members had worked in fairly complete isolation from one another until
van Deesburg brought them together. Thus, among the architects, van
t’Hoff only met Oud through the agency of van Doeshurg, who, himself,
had only come across van t Hoff through a newspaper article about his
houses at Huis ter Heide outside Utrecht. There was even a certain amount
of suspicion existing between some of the members before the actual founda-
tion of the group in 1917 and van der Leck, the painter, is reported as being
unwilling te join if Oud and other architects were also to be admitted.
This is net to be attributed solely to personal causes. Over the early
deliberations of the members broods the spectre of Berlage’s version of
Gesamtkunstwerk, in which painting and sculpture were to be subservient
to architecture,? and van der Leck had no intention of being told what te
do by architects. However, he contributed (under deception, he claims)
one of the keynote articles to the first issue of de Sti, in which he sets out a
compromise position, accepting the Berlagian thesis in part, and then
expressing its consequences on a gid pro que basis, with painting and archi-
tecture in a sort of competitive partnership.

1 This study of de Stijl is heavily indebted to Dr H. L. C. Jaffé’s book de Stat
1977~1937 (Amsterdam, 1¢56) as all future studies of the mevement will be, and also
to the personal narratives given me by Rob van t’Hoff, Mart Stam and Walter Segal.

* As discussed in the previous chapter,

Painting has, in the cycle of time, separated itself from architecture, and

developed independently, destroying old and naturalistic methods through

expenimentation. .. .

Nevertheless it always hag need of some flat surface, and its ultimate aim ia to

work upon the useful, necessary surfaces created by the art of building, More

than that, by its return to integration from isolation, it shall flavour the whole,

and, by demanding suitable formal conceptions from architecture, it will regain

its proper domain.
Though van der Leck resigned on discovering that the group contained
architects after all, the position set out in these two quotations was, within
limits, one that most members of the group could accept, even if, like
Mondriaan they had reservations based on a sense that they were not yet
ready for any Gesamtkunstwerk, as he wrote to van Doesburg

You should remember that my things are still intended to be paintings...

not part of a building.
They felt, clearly, that their various arte had been refined, in isolation, to
the point where their essences had been revealed, and been revealed as
common to all the arts because geometrical and rectilinear, This common
rectilinear character (so strongly felt by van Doesburg that he had thought
of cailing the magazine by some such title as The Straight Line, before
opting for the Berlagian de Saji) was to some extent the product of an
almost anti-historical set of coincidences: on the one hand, the architects
working on Berlagian and Wrightian precepts had arrived at a simple formula
of plain vertical walls and flat roofs, free from decorative elements; on the
other hand Mondriaan, and possibly other painters as well, inspired by the
rectilinear mystical cosmogony of the theosophist Schoenmaekers, was on
the point of arriving at an equally simple formula of rectangular patches of
colour framed in horizontal and vertical lines, and free from figurative
elements. Given this, it was suddenly and visibly possible, in Berlage's
phrase, to have a style again (though not a style that Berlage himself would
have liked), What is more, this style was to have practically all the social
and cultural attributes that Berlage had postulated, and an even more
openly Utopian slant. Between them, Mondriaan and van Doesburg
created a fairly consistent image of a new world, based on the happenings
and discoveries within their own small group and the outside world as they
saw it, Mondriaan opened the first paragraph of the first article in the first
issue of de Sti? with the assertion

The life of contemporary cultivated man is turning gradually away from

nature; it becomes more and more an a-b-s-t-reaecet Life.
and practically every word in this simple-seeming statement is loaded with
accessory meanings. The confrontation of abstract and nature is vital to the
whole argument. From 1gro, to the time this article was written, Mon-
driaan had been cautiously developing towards a purely abstract (non-
figurative) style of painting, and in the process he had developed an
elaborate and complex body of expository thought to go with it. The drift

of all this theorising, heavily indebted to Schoenmaekers and alsa to
writers like Kandinsky, was the common neo-Platonic idea, widely used
by apologists of abstraction like Roger Fry,* that there was an ultimate
reality lying behind the accidents of mere appearance, that painters should
eschew the ‘nature’ of Realistic and Impressionist painting, which waa
entirely taken up with merely accidental qualities, and concentrate on the
enduring absolutes of geometry, Schoenmackers’s beeldende wiskunde (i.e.
creative mathematics) or Kandinsky’s ‘spiritual in art’,

The spirituality of Abstract art is insisted upon by van Doesburg in
vaguely Hegelian terms

It must be understood that all works which are wrought according to the

spirit must diverge from the external forms of nature, and that they will diverge

completely... when the spirit achieves perfect clarity.4
But, in the wider context of society and human culture, nature is also, for
the Szijlkunstenaer, brute matter and brute man unredeemed by the spirit,
which presumably is why Mondriaan specifies cultivated man as the enjoyer
of a more and more abstract life, rather as Adolf Loos specifies advanced
culture as the concomitant of freedom from ornament. But Mondriaan also
specifies that his cultivated man be ‘contemporary’, and this introduces
the progressivist-Utopian theme that runs strongly through early de Sti!
theory. It will have been noted that van der Leck equated the naturalistic
with the old; in the first Manifesto of de Sti! the signatories state

1. There is an old and a new spirit of the times... .

2. The War is destroying the old world and its contents .., etc.
and, in general there is an almost Futurist sense of change and excitement
in their writings, a sense that in their own time they will see a final break
through from the old, corrupt world into a new and pure one. Almost
inevitably, mechanisation figures largely in this vision, but not as some-
thing worth having for its own sake, or simply because it was new, as the
Futurists saw it. For de Sti, machinery, in separating Man from Nature
hastened the spiritualisation of life. Van Doesburg wrote more than once

The machine ts, por excellence, a phenomenon of spiritual discipline. Materi-

alism as a Way of life and art took handicraft as its direct psychological expres-~

sion, The new spiritual artistic sensibility of the twentieth century has not

only felt the beauty of the machine, but has also taken cognisance of its un-

limited expressive possibilities for the arts. ... Under the supremacy of materi-

alism, handicraft reduced men to the level of machines; the proper tendency for

the machine (in the sense of cultural development) is as the unique medium of
the very opposite, social liberation."

* Fry made this point explicitly m his essay ‘Art and Socialism’, also reprinted in
Piston and Design.

* De Srji, UL, p, 65.

* This version is from an essay left uncompleted at the time of van Doesburg’s
death in 1931, but close variants of it can be traced back ta 1924, if not earlier, and
make it clear that this particular concept of the cultural meaning of mechanisation
was one to which he was very attached.

and again
Every machine is the spirttualisation of an organism.

This substantial reversal of both Rationalist materialism and Futurist
mechanolatry is extended by Mondriaan’s views on the Modern city

The genuinely Modern artist sees the metropolis as Abstract living converted
into form; it is nearer to him than nature, and is more likely to stir in him the
sense of beauty... that is why the metropolis is the place where the comimg
mathematical artistic temperament is being developed, the place whence the new
atyle will emerge.

and the implied equation between Abstract art and machinery that runs
through these passages receives support from the fact that both were also
seen as instruments of something else that was built into de Siyi's pro-
gramme: the depersonalisation of art. Individualism was part of the old
world and the old spirit of the times, according to the first Manifesto, but
the employment of reinforced concrete, seen a8 a machine material

. removes the personal character from a building and thus tends towards a
group art... with rhythmic inter-relationships of even the smallest structural
parts, and no addition of decoration.

and, in his own eyes at least, a similar generalisation was the tendency of
Mendriaan’s paintings

They unfold to us a world of universal beauty

It is interesting to note that this virtual equation between machinery and
art was drawn without postulating a theory of Types or Norms as one of its
terms, as Berlage or Muthestus might have done, or as the theorists of the
Cubist tradition were to do in Paris, But, as H. L, C, Jaffé bas pointed out,
the well-known tag about absolute beauty, geometry and mechanical pro-
ducts, from Plato’s Philebus, which so often appears in conjunction with the
theory of Types, does not appear anywhere in de Stijl, Rather, they relied
upon an implied analogy, which was brought to the surface only by Gino
Severini, the ex-Futurist, who was a kind of corresponding member of the
group, and proposed, in an early article under the symptomatic heading
Le Machinisme et l Art—Reconstruction de P Univers

The construction of a machine is analogous to the construction of a work of art

and

we may conclude that the effect produced on the spectator by the machine is
analogous to that produced by the work of art

From this summary of de Stil attitudes to machinery and art, it will be
clear that they had already crossed the watershed that divides the pre-
War Futurist attitude to machinery as the agent of private, romantic, anti-
Classical disorder, from the post-War ‘Machine Aesthetic’ that saw


machinery as the agent of collective discipline and an order that drew
nearer and nearer to the canons of Classical aesthetics. But it must also be
recognised that this attitude, as it appears in de Sizji was also anti-Materia-
list and anti-Determinist, and, in view of the wide distribution of this and
related attitudes in the Twenties, one should be very cautious of regarding
the machine enthusiasts of that epoch as Determinists or Materialists, as is
so often done. Their own writings will confirm the incorrectness of this
reading of their intentions, since they almost always protest that ‘the
machine’ is an instrument, net an objective of human existence. But it was
the theorists of de Sizji who first transmogrified Futurism into this form,
and they seem to have the best right te be considered the true founders of
that enlightened Machine Aesthetic that inspired the best work of the
Twenties,

lf they transmogrified Futurism for their theoretical ends, they wrought
an equal transformation of Cubism for their formal purposes, and the
parallel processes by which this was done are typical of the conflation of
Cubist practice and Futurist ideas that was the common inheritance of
nearly all progressive movements after 1917. ‘The sources of the art of van
Doesburg and Mondriaan in pre-War Cubism were admitted by both of
them, and can easily be traced in Mondriaan’s paintings in particular.
Although Mondriaan seerns to have conceived of his Nieuwe Reelding as a
genuine successor-style to Cubism, van Doesburg seems to have regarded
his work more as a continuation of the abstracting processes that Cubism
had imitiated, and did not mtroduce a new word for his own art until he
coined (or borrowed) Elementarism in 1926. Oud seems never to have been
in doubt that the art practised by his painter-colleagues was a form of
Cubism, even if he later came to believe it a corrupt form. This attitude
of Oud’s may well be the basis of subsequent confusion about a direct
influence of Cubism on architecture, Such an influence is hard to find, and
attempts to compare buildings of the ‘International Style’ with Cubist
paintings, particularly those done in 1909-12 in Paris, are never very con-
vincing. But if Cubisrn is read in Qud’s extended sense, a sense that would
easily cover the work of the Russian Abstractionists as well, then compari-
gona are possible and an influence admissible,

During the period that Oud was a member of de Szijl, however, influence
was slight, Mondriaan and van Doesburg had developed their rectangular
Abstraction to a fairly advanced degree, and had investigated many of its
possibilities; their pictures were not yet restricted to a repertoire of coloured
rectangles completely boxed in heavy black lines, and were still experi-
menting with overlapping rectangles, rectangles only partly boxed by Lines,
pictures based on free distribution of parts, and those composed on regular
modular prids like the Quadratur en Trianguiatur of Berlage and other
followers of de Groot. They thus offered a very rich range of possible com-
positional techniques in one piane that architects could employ, while

contemporary de Sijf sculpture, assembled, usually pyramidally, from
juxtaposed or interpenetrating prisms, offered almost aa many possibilities
in three dimensions,

But very little of this made much direct impact on the buildings which
characterise the early phase of de Sizyi, and tend to follow Berlage where
they do not follow Wright. Ne painterly influence on Robert van t'Hoff’s
house and summerhouse at Huis ter Heide is to be expected anyhow, since
these had been commissioned, designed and completed before the group
came into existence. Their appearance was conspicuously Wrightian, which
was hardly surprising since their designer had actually been to Chicago to
meet Wright, had seen the Unity Temple, the Rabie House, etc. and seems
to have been the member of de Sii{i who introduced the others to Wright's
work.* The second, larger house at Huis ter Heide is more important for its
structure than for its tidy, symmetrically Wrightian exterior, for it was 2
pioneer concrete post-and-slab villa, designed at least as early as Le Core
busier’s Lorm-ine structure, though far less free in plan. Van t Hoff was
also designing furniture almest as early as this, and since some of it was
built in Gerrit Rietveld’s workshop, it may well have been van tHoff
who introduced Rietveld both to Wright’s furniture, and to his own pre-
ference for making each structural member a plain rectangular wooden
element, visually discrete fram even these to which it was attached.

Even in 1927-19 neither of the other two main de Sti/ architects makes
so clear an impression of maturity and control, In Oud’s hostel ‘de Yonk’
and Wals’s restaurant ‘De Dubbele Sleutel’ of 1919, with both of which
van Doesburg was involved as colour-consultant, the structure consists of
plain rectangular piers and walls of Berlagian brickwork, capped by thickish
flat overhangs (not always concealing flat roofs) that come from Wright
either direct or by way of Huis ter Heide, ‘De Dubbele Sleutel’, built on
to the side of existing buildings is mildly asymmetrical, whereas the free-
standing ‘de Vonk’ presents a strictly formal and axial appearance. It is
surprising in retrospect how little of Oud’s work of the period is anything
but axial. The project for a smat!l house in concrete of 1917 is symmetrical,
as is the planning of much of his large-scale housing; the Strand-boulevard
project of rgr7, though it postulates an endless series of repetitive units,
has each unit symmetrical, and of the two factory projects of 1919 one is

" According to van t'Hoff it would appear that Oud was ignorant of Wnoght’s
work (in spite of Berlage) until he was introduced by van Doesburg to van t Hoff
and saw the mass of material on Wright that the latter had brought back with him
from the U.S. The story gains weight from the sudden manner in which the Robie
House (which particularly impressed van t'Hoff) comes to the forefront of discus-
sions of Wright's work, and displaces the Coonley and Isabel Roberts houses, which
had dominated the scene under the influence of im the Cause, ay described in the
previous chapter, As to the situation with Rietveld, the instrumentality of van
t Hoff in bringing Wright to his notice is not doubted, but versions differ—though
all, pgain agree that it was in connection with the furnishing of the house at Huis
ter Heide,

=

symmetrical. The other, which is for Oud a remarkably free and diversified
composition, has at least one passage of complex asymmetrical space-
manipulation by means of projecting horizontal and vertical elements;
sills, door-jambs, chimneys, balustrades, window-mullions, etc. that is
unlike anything else in his own recorded work, and is as advanced for its
day as the contemporary de Sif interiors of Wilmes Huszar, or the series
of chairs that Gerrit Rietveld was developing from 1917 onwards, though
their full importance did not emerge till later.

The general caution of Oud’s approach seems to have been an integral
part of his character, and he felt so strongly the weight of responsibility
that was placed upon his shoulders when he became city architect of
Rotterdam at the very early age of twenty-eight, that he abstained from
committing himself to many of de Stjl's activities (he signed none of the
Manifestoes or petitions, for instance). Caution appears also in his more
considered writings, which were published after he, and most of the other
early members of the group, had resigned, but jess so in his notes and
captions in de Stijl before that date. Even so, the most interesting early
contribution on architecture to the magazine, the first that breaks new
ground in Holland—and indeed Europe north of the Alps—is Rob van
tHoff’s commentary to a drawing by Sant’Eha, which appeared in
August 191g. Van t’Hoff had known Marinetti and other Futurists in
London before the outbreak of the War, but had not met Sant’Eha—the
photograph of the drawing was brought to his attention by van Doesburg,
who had received it with other Futurist material from Italy, as a result,
presumably, of his first attempts to establish international contacts as soon
as hostilities had finished, It is of one of the case a gradinete, with external
lift-tower and illuminated advertising signs on its parapet, and in view of
the number of times it was reproduced (or re-reproduced from de Sizl}
in Germany and elsewhere it must have become the very best known of all
Sant’Elia drawings.

Van t'Hoff writes? first of Sant’Elia himself, however, and in terms that
have been echoed ever since. He deplores the oblivion in which the ‘un-
known’ architect has been lost, his early death, the shortage of ground-plans
of his buildings and the fragmentary nature of his urbanistic vision. He also
assumes from the horizontal banding of the wall surfaces that they have
been plastered, which, he says, reveals a lack of clarity

However, the perfect management of this building taken aa a whole, carried
out in modem materials, so that we can consider it free from any adventitious
effect, makes this work (and another to be reproduced later) worthy to be
included in the new international! trend in art. The aversion that Sant'Elia had
for ‘high class architecture’ and Classicism with its decorative and academic
approach, gives this work a freshness, 2 tautness and definiteness of expression,
whereas most current art lacks this strength,

¥ De Sel, Il, pp. rr4, 175.

At the end he reprints a cut version of the affirmations from the end of the
Manifesto of Futurist Architecture, prefacing them with the pious hope
May some of the following thoughts, e.g. that every generation (the buildings
are in steel and concrete) shall have its own city, become dominant, and may we
never diminish our appreciation for this architect who died so young.
As was so often the case with magazines of this kind, another Sant’Elia
promised for publication at a later date did not materialise, but two by
Chiattone did appear in due course, with a commentary by Oud, which
characterised them as exhibiting the Vaagheid der Romantiek as against the
Klaarheid eener hoogere realiteit of Sant’Elia. However, Qud rarely showed
any interest in the work of any architect outside Holland, except Frank
Licyd Wright, and he tended to elaborate his theories upon the basis of
his own practical experience, plus a view of the general trend of world art
as it was represented to him by his colleagues of de Sif. Or, to be more

precise historically, as it had been represented to him by his former col- |

leagues, for his larger writings date from 1921, the year in which he left
the proup, and onwards. But he stuck to the opinions he had formed then,
and did not follow the later development of de Siiji—apparently because
he did not want to develop or change his position.

But to me the revealed line of development appears straight; and should it show

itself devious, I stand by my right to believe it straight, This tine is for me

essential. ...
The bulk of these more considered and more fully elaborated writings is
made up of three essays which finally appeared together in one volume
of the Bauhausbiicher in 1926, The first of these (as it appears in this
volume) deals with the history of Modern architecture in Holland (Die
Entwicklung der madernen Baukunst in Holiand} and was written in 1922-3.
It establishes what was already becoming an orthodox family tree descend-
ing from Cuijpers through Berlage to himself; it anathematises the work of
the Amsterdam school, and it relates his own work to that of a few select
buildings abroad that seem to him das Fundament .. . einer allgemeinen
Schénheit, etnes Stiles, zu ergeben, which prove to be only Le Corbusier's
Villa at Vaucresson, Gropius’s remodelling of the Stadttheater at Jena, and
Linberg-Holm’s design for the Chicago Tribune Tower. But, at that time,
he would have been hard put to it to find anything even up to the standard
of his own workers’ housing at the Hook of Holland, which he also illus-
trates, without drawing on Amsterdam or Expressionist sources, and, with-
in the fairly narrow limits of good and bad which he had set himself, he
could indeed

say this without Chauvinism, that present-day Dutch architecture has achieved

Importance
though even three years later its position of European leadership had
already been lost.


The second essay, Der Einfluss von Frank Lloyd Wright auf die Architektur
Europas, seems to have been written partly for this Bawhausbuch, and partly
for the Wendingen volume on Wright which appeared in 1925, It does not
contain much by way of appreciation of Wright that might not have been
wiitten by. Berlage, except for some comments on the de luxe aspects of
Wright’s domestic wark, to which reference will be made in the next
chapter. There is however, an important attempt to sort out the meaning
of the Wrightian and painterly contribution to younger Dutch architects’
work that sheds light on what ‘Cubism’—that is, the art of Mondriaan and
van Doesburg—meant to him, It proved disappointing, he says, because
formalism weakened its impact just at the time when its consequences
promised to be of the greatest importance for the future of the art of
building. Nevertheless

Like the influence of Wright, Cubism played an important part in producing the

characteristic forms that found expression in the aforementioned current of

European architecture (sci. de Styl}
and he was prepared to put a very high valuation on its contribution to the
growth of the new architecture of his generation

Cubism was an introspection—and a beginning. Trusting in the future, it

imposed duties, where former generations, parasiting on the paat, had taken

liberties, ‘The unintentional Romanticism of its vehement drive for co-ordina-
tion contained the inception of a new formal synthesis, an unhistorical Clas-

The need for number and measure, for cleanliness and order, for standardisa-

tion and repetition, for perfection and high finish; the properties of the organa

of modern living, such as technique, transport and hygiene in the sphere of
eocial conditions, mass-production methods among economic circumstances—
all these find their fore-ninner in Cubisrn.
It is clear that this version of ‘Cubism’ contains very little of what went on
in Paris before 1914, but a great deal of what had preoccupied Werkbund
and Futurist theorists, subsumed in the pure clean abstraction of de Sigjl
painting.

Tt was with ideas such as these already in his mind that Gud built out
from basically Berlagian foundations the philosophy of architecture set out
in Uber die xukiinftige Baukunst und thre architehtonischen Moglichkeiten.
This essay is of the greatest interest because it was written in 1921, when he
was in the process of breaking away from de Stijl, but, at that early date,
must also be the first major theoretical pronouncement by any of the lead-
ing architects of the mainstream of development in the Twenties. He him-
self (in accord with his professed policy of sticking to his earlier ideas)
was prepared to let it stand unaltered when it was reproduced in the
Bauhausbuch in 1926, though it is clear from a set of aphorisms under the
title Fa und Nem that had appeared in Wasmuth’s Monatshefte in the pre-
vious year, that some of his ideas were under revision, and that he was also
dissociating himself from concepts that his contemporaries had put in
circulation. Thus

I bow the knee to the wonder of technology, but I do not believe that « liner
can be compared to the Parthenon.

I long for a house that will satisfy my every demand for comfort, but a house
ja not for me a living-machine,

and it is hard to reconcile the endlessly repeated house-units of the
Strandboulevard project, and his proposition of May 1918 that mass-
production will make better aesthetic sense in mass-housing than in
individual dwellings, with
I await a style-defining crystallisation of form through the normalisation of
building-eiements, yet the mass-produced house seems too difficult to organise
into collective assemblies.
Yet he allowed the text of Zukiinftige Baukunst to stand. It opens with a
sober celebration of the defeat of Academic and Ruskinian theory, and a
restatement of Berlage’s aesthetic of repose

Life is struggle, but art in ita highest form is victory, ie. consummation.

Then follows an arraignment of the state of architecture as he found it, with
its main fault identified as what the Futurists would have termed Passatisme

Not only is the art of building not in advance of ita time, it is not even abreast
of it, and acts as a drag on the necessary progress of life . , . no longer aiming to
embody the most desirable kind of dwelling in the most beautiful form, but
offering to one and all a preconception of beauty which it places before ali other
considerations. ... Thus it cames about that the preducta of technological pro-
gress do not find immediate application in building, hut are first scrutinised hy
the standards of the ruling aesthetic, and if, as usual, found to be in oppasi-
tion to them, will have difficulty in maintaining themselves against the venerable
weight of the architectural profession,

He cites plate-glass, iron, reinforced concrete and machine-produced com-
ponents as examples, but admits that no art is harder to reform than that of
architecture. Against the chaos and empty formalism of this situation he sets
a vision of de Stil’s abstract millentum
In life, the unavoidable consequence imposes itself, nonetheless, with iron
inevitability: Spirit overcomes Nature.
Machinery supplants animal strength, philosophy replaces faith. The stability
of old concepts of life is undermined, the natural concordance of their organs
destroyed. New spiritual complexes are forged and free themselves from the old
naturalistic ones, setting up an opposed equilibrium. ...
Only the art of building, that has the duty of reflecting the culture of its times,
remains immune to this spiritual crisis.
The echoes of Sant’Elia here (cf. New spiritual complexes are forged, with
st sono relevati attegiamentt della spirito, etc.) are so clear that one is not
surprised to find Futurism listed first among the movements that were
not immune to the spiritual crisis, on account of its ‘painterly reconciliation
of space and time’ (an idea owed to van Doesburg*). The other movement

"In his Bavhausbuch (Munich, 1924, No. 6) published under the title of
Grundbegriffe der neuen gestaltenden Kunst and based on lectures given much earlier,
van Poesburg had illustrated a very ‘dynamic’ Cubo-Futurist drawing of his own
as a ranniuettiich reconstruction of a nude.

rm.

not immune was Cubism, in which he found

through the analysis of natural form, the beginning of the tranaition from the
natural to the spiritual, from the illustrative to the creative, from the closed to
the spaual
and it is in these painterly activities that the salvation of architecture must
lie since
what it may net accomplish by its own powers may be achieved by the force of
external circumstances, in addition toa internal ones.

He counters the inevitable objection that architecture, unlike the free arts,

is concerned with utility as well as beauty, by pointing out that in many
useful objects where

the nuling aesthetic plays a diminishing part in determining ultimate form...
the drive for beauty in man is nevertheless so creat that, as if by themselves,
these objects achieve elementary aesthetic form over and above purely technical
considerations

and his justificatory examples are, as might be expected, a conglobation of
Futurist and Werkbund admirations

, automobiles, steamers, yachts, men’s wear, sports clothes, electrical and
sanitary equipment, table-ware and sa forth, possesa within themselves, as the
purest expressions of their time, the elements of a new language of aesthetic
form, and can be considered as the pomt of departure for a new art, through
their restrained form, lack of ommament and plain colours, the comparative
perfection of their materials and the purity of their proportions—targely due to
their new, mechanical methods of production,

All this encourages a drive toward Abstraction m architecture as well, Dut
it is negative and does not have the aesthetic ‘tension’ of

self-realisation in a great rhythmically balanced complex of interconnected,

opposing but mutually-influenced parts, each of which supports the general

aesthetic intention so that nothmg can be added, nor taken away... and any

alteration, even the srnaliest, results in complete destruction of the whole
alance.

This appearance of Alberti (nothing added nor taken away) in the same
paragraph as Berlage and so soon after Sant’Elia, is not difficult to parallel,
in the quotations from Plotinus that appear in other de Sti texts, or from
Plato in equivalent writings from Paris, and it suggests that Oud’s ‘unhis-
torical Classicism’ means here what similar ideas usually mean, Academic
aesthetics without Academic detailing.

Where such an Albertian balance is lacking, Qud observed, the architec-
ture of his day made up for it with decoration, in spite of the fact that

Building without ornament affords the greatest possibilities for purity of
architectural expression

and

All decoration js inessential, mere outward compensation for inner impotence.

Teo account for the needless (as he saw it) duality of structure and ornament
he has recourse to a familiar neo-Classical postulate, the primitive hut
(which seerss to be a close relation of the cave in which Adolf Loos sup-
posed the first work of art to have been smudged)

Ag soon as the first hut was built it was decorated, and the foundation was laid

for centuries of subsequent anachronisms . . . and the muddiing equation of
Beauty and Decoration took shape

but new, with the abstract millenium at hand

,». a self-created architecture is pogstble at last, to which the other arts are no

longer applied, and therefore no tonger subordinated, but work organically with

it
and this architecture (which would presumably have gratified van der Leck}
would also have satisfied, in a complicated way, the ideal simplicity ad-
mired by Mondriaan, since

.. dt endures no decoration, since it ts in itself a complete space-creating

organism, by which all decoration becomes individualisation, and therewith

limitation, of the universal, i.e, the spatial,
This last sentence brings us close to the inner, inexplicable mystique of
de Styl at large, as well as of Oud in particular: the equation of individu-
alism, decoration, handicraft and limitation (or closure) and its opposition
to the matching equation of universalism, abstraction, machine-production
and spatiality, makes sense as far as the first three terms of each set are
concerned, but the last pair of terms, both in their connection to the rest
of the set, and their opposition to ane another, do not seem to follow,
unless this spatiality/enclosure contrast is somehow to be derived from the
mystical peometry of Schoenmaekers. Be that as it may, the implication that
space is infinite space, net the enclosed Rawm of Berlage, was probably
vital to the integration of de Styi into international Abstract art, for both
Malevitsch and Lissitsky also regarded space in this manner.

The reader’s sense that he has reached one of those core concepts that
can only be discussed tautologically is reinforced at this point by the way
in which Oud suddenly abandons generalities and turns to more practical
matters, as if he had gone as far as he could along this road. On the practical
side, Qud notes first the progressive invasion of all parts of building by
mechanical methods, in spite of the obstacles put in their way, and in par-
ticular the impact of mechanical detailing:

In contrast to handicraft details, that is those made by manual means—uncer-

tain in form, proportion and colour—which elaborate endless variations on a

dominant motif, it is the distinguishing feature of mechanical detailing that,

relizbly related in form and colour, it is perfectly similar to all other details of
the same sort prepared at the same time.
Then he notes that new materials will not have any revolutionary effect
where traditional formulae hinder their proper use:
When iron came in, great hopes were entertained of a new atchitecture, but

a an

it fell nesthetically-apeaking into the background through improper applica-
fon, ...

Because of ita visible solidity—uniike plate-glass which is only solid to the
touch—-we have supposed its destination to be the creation of masses and
planes, instead of reflecting that the characteristic feature of iron construction
is that it offers the maximum of structural strength with the mimimum of
maternal, ... Ita architectural value therefore lies in the creation of voida, not
solids, in contrast to masg-walling, not continuing it.

similarly with glass

divided ... into small parts by the customary glazing bars, it optically continues

the solidity of the wall over the openings as well
and should therefore always be used in the largest possible sheets with the
thinnest possible glazing bars and mulhons.

He sees even more exciting possibilities in the use of reinforced concrete,
which avoids the limitations imposed on brick by its modular sizes and its
restricted spans over openings

Besides, the unfitness of other materials for the acceptance of tensile loading...
hinders the construction of extensive horizontal spans and cantilevers. The com-
bination of the necessary auxiliary materials such as wood and iron... with
brick, is generally too heteropencous to lead ta satisfactory solutions in these
aort of cases. If it is not plastered over, then neither a strict clean Line in the
brickwork nor a pure homogeneous plane is established, since the small units
and the multiplicity of ioms prevent this,

Against this, reinforced concrete offers a homogeneous coherence of sup-

porting and supported parts, horizontal spreads of considerable dimensions,

and the possibility of co-ordinating pure planes and masses,
This idea of using concrete to create a purely apparent unification of load
and support shows how much aesthetic parti-pris lurks even in the practi-
calities of a man like Qud who left de Sij! because he felt its aesthetics were
becoming teo precious, but it is not unique, nor restricted to Holland, for
one will find plaster freely used to create a fictitious homogeneity of breeze-
block and concrete in much housing work by convinced Modernists in
Germany, and of pot-tile and concrete in several houses by Le Corbusier.

in general the possibilities in reinforced concrete for creating buildings
in which successive floors grow larger in plan as one ascends, and walls can
be stepped forward, instead of being battered back in the common manner,
give

ona constructive basis, the fundamentals for an art of building of an optically-

immaterial, almost hovering appearance,

Then he turns to colour, the last important element in his architectural
philosophy, and in this context handicraft materials are decried for an
entirely fresh set of reasons, viz., that they are too nwancé and atmospheric
in hue (which apparently smacked of Impressionism to Oud) and, worse
still, their hues changed under weathering

a0 that what was criginally a harmony could become a discord in a week; a

discord that would strike the eye all the more clearly when pure painted colours

have been used than where a more neutral tint is employed—a circumstance

wr

that probably explains the preference for dark green paint to set againat the
prevatling brick-grey of our country,

And so he comes to his conclusions

All in all, it follows that an architecture rationally based on the circumstances
of life today would be in every sense oppesed to the sort of architecture that
has existed up till now, Without falling into barren rationalism it would remain,
above ail, objective, but within this objectivity would experience higher things,
In the sharpest contrast to the untechnically-formed and colourless products of
momentary inspiration as we know them, its ordained task will be, in perfect
devotion to an almost impersonal method of technical creation, to shape
organisms of clear form and pure proportions, In place of the natural! attractiona
of uncultivated materials, the broken hues in glass, the irregularity of finishes,
the paleness of colour, the clouding of glazes, the weathering of walls, etc. it
would unfold the stimulating qualities of sophisticated materials, the Limpidity
of glass, the shine and roundness of finishes, lustrous and shining coloura, the
glitter of steel, and so forth.

Thus the development of the art of building goes toward an architecture more
bound to matter than ever before in essence, but in appearance mising clear of
material considerations; free from all Impressionistic creation of atrnosphere,
in the fullness of light, brought to purity ef proportion and rcofour, organic
elarity of form; an architecture that, in its freedom from inessentialism could
surpass even Classical purity.

These are the words of a cautious man, who developed a middle-of-the-
road reputation, was regarded as a Functionalist, and probably saw himself
as one, and yet they announce the aim of replacing one kind of architectural
ilhustonism {Impressionist atmospherics) by an even more deceptive one,
in which greater materiality shall be disguised as decreased materiality; yet
another warning that if the architecture of the Twenties is regarded in the
purely materialistic terms in which it is commonly discussed, much of its
point will be lost. Nowhere among the major figures of the Twenties will a
pure Functionalist be found, an architect who designs entirely without
aesthetic intentions, and once those intentions are admitted (as they com-
monly were, in se many words) then illusionism, particularly the illusion
of weightlessness, or of structural homogeneity, follows hard on their heels.

13: Exprassionism: Amsterdam and Berlin

IT WOULD BE altogether too facile to regard the various anti-Rationalist
tendencies of 1914-23 a8 a revolt against the mainstream of development,
or as a serious alternative ‘school’ to the emergent International Style,
Though Twentieth-century architecture was undoubtedly impoverished for-
mally by the demise of this manner of design, the resolute paring-down to
one particular set of formal and structural solutions that took place in the
early Twenties seems to have been a necessary phase of self-discipline and
brain-cleansing before development could resume. It would, indeed, be
better to regard Wendingen and Expressionist architecture as late out-
croppings of attitudes to design that had been part of the main body of
European architecture before 1914, but became tacreasingly unacceptable
on formal grounds after 1918. And it should be emphasised that despite the
tentative alliance of Amsterdam and Berlin in rg1g, they were separate
developments both in origin and character.

Since Amsterdam possesses the larger body of work, done over more than
a decade, and was the instigator of the short-lived alliance, it will be dealt
with first. The chief ornament of the school was Michel de Klerk (1884-
1923) as already mentioned, and he, with Piet Kramer, the next most
brilliant member of the Amsterdam school, did much of the detailing and
interior work on van der Mey's Scheepvaartshuts in 1913. There, and at de
Klerk’s independent Hiflehuis two years earlier, one can see emerging 2
distinctive style that might be called twentieth-century in accent, unre-
strainedly eclectic in vocabulary, but nineteenth-century in its phraseology.
Indeed the Hillehuis follows structural precepts that go back even further
in Dutch town-house practice, but the Scheepuaarishuts follows, more or
less, the structural precedents worked out in Berlage’s office-buildings be-
fore the turn of the century. However, where Berlage’s structures tend to
be invested in a kind of neutralised Romanesque detailing by the time he
came to design the Beurs, the detailing of these two pioneer works of the
Amsterdam school is far from neutral in tone, and draws from a variety
of sources, including Art Nouveau in general and Toorop in particular,
Expressionist painting and carving, de Groot’s mathematical exercises,

from Berlage himself, and from Wright, As J, J. P. Gud observed at dif-
ferent times these last two are to be accounted the mere important in-
fluences on the style, and this probably accounts for the strain of interest
in exhibited structure (or pseudo-structure) that runs right through the
decade of the school’s greatest activity, also the tendency to use common-
place materials, like brick, tile-hanging and wood, in a manner that shows
genuine affection, and such as Berlage could hardly have disapproved.
Thus, on the Scheepvaartshuts, structural corbels made from several pieces
of stone are allowed to appear, in spite of elaborate figurative carving, as
corbels carved from several pieces of stone. Examples of this kind could be
multiplied throughout the work of the school, and they emphasise the right
of de Klerk and his connection to be regarded as the true heirs of certain
aspects of Berlage and Wright, just as much as J. J. P. Qud and his con-
nection were the heirs of other aspects. It was, no doubt, this common
heritage that made it possible for Jan Wils, for instance, to pass fram one
side to the other without ceasing to write admiringly of Wright, and also
made it possible for the Amsterdam and Rotterdam schools to fuse fairly
painlessly into a national style once de Klerk was dead and van Doesburg
was out of the country—though the process was no doubt facilitated by the
existence, around 1925, of independent Wright/Berlagians like Willem
Marinus Dudok, who subsequently became the hero-figure of middle-of-
the-road Modernists.

However, the main characteristics of the Amsterdam School all lie in
the direction of the physical manipulation of the building in the course of
erection, rather than in intellectual decisions made beforehand: its vital
expression is in its detailing, which is often representational and therefore
its history is iconographical, rather than theoretical, and lies outside the
scope of the present study. However, it served a useful irritant function in
other people’s theoretical writings, and not only acted as a standing
example of individualistic licentiousness at which the moralists of de Stijl
could point the finger of scorn, but also drew their attention to things that
they might otherwise have missed in the work of Frank Lloyd Wright, for
instance. Thus Oud, noting the misuse of Wright’s example in Europe,
draws attention to a vital aspect of his work that escaped comment else-
where, and to which his own attention was almost certainly directed by the
contrast between Amsterdam architecture and that of his own ‘Cubist’
connection.

That which in Cubism—and it cannot be otherwise—is puritanical asceticism,
spiritual self-denial, is with Wright exuberant plasticity, sensuous superfluity.
What arises in Wright from the fuilness of life to a degree of luxury that could
only fit into an Amenecan ‘High-life’, withdraws in Europe to abstraction that
derives fram other idealy and embraces ail men and everything.

If one substitutes ‘Dutch middle-class’ for ‘American’ one could equally
well substitute de Klerk for Wright, for one of the aspects of his work, aa
a


in the Spaarndam housing, that has given offence to Rationalista ever since
it was built, is the air of mild luxury it exudes, a luxury felt ta be some-
how improper to mass-housing. Another embarrassment concerning the
Spaarndam housing is that it is difficult to make the favoured accusation
of superficiality stick to it. Practically the whole Amsterdam School were
de facta guilty of superficial ‘facadism’ in the work they did around the
Amstellaan,! where they were called in simply to put by-law fronts on to
contractor’s housing, but on the Spaarndam, and in the triangular block
that faces the Zaanstraat in particular, de Klerk cannot be made answer-
able for the crimes committed by his connection elsewhere. Inner and outer
spaces, main and subsidiary buildings, public and private areas are related
and integrated with a subtlety and understanding of effect that could not
have been equalled in Holland in 1917, the year of its design, and that Qud
himself probably could not haye equalled at any time, even had he wanted
to.

However, de Kierk’s brilliance was of a somewhat improvisatory nature;
the Amsterdam School, deprived of his constant example, began to decline
from the moment of his death, because he left behind neither a workshop
tradition nor a body of ideas committed to paper. Wendingen, Theo van der
Wijdeveld’s magazine, which was the official mouthpiece of the Amsterdam
School, contrived to deduce no general principles from his work, and is, in
fact, a disappointing vehicle of architectural theory. Its best achievements
were its special numbers, and volumes fers serte, in honour of great men,
including three on de Klerk, as a memorial after his death, one on Bezlage,
a small one on Eric Mendelsohn, and the double-number on Wright to
which reference has aiready been made.

However, a general reading of Wendingen does serve to emphasise what
other strains of architectural thought were current in the Amsterdam
School besides the Berlagian. As has been noted, Jan Wils’s equation of
Wright with the Futurists appeared in Wendingen,? and the rest of his re-
marks are worth quoting because they underline a Futurist content in
Amsterdam thought, informing and transforming a vaguely Berlagian social
awareness, and a hint of Loosian rhetoric,

And now it happened that a new strange sound was heard, the sound of exul-
tant masses, liberated, aware of their strength, breaking the fetters of the past,
sensing the sublime conquest of a new future; the sound of great vibrating
machines and humming dynamos, that stand ready in their giant strength to
lead, through unworthy generations, to the ultimate welfare and service of Man-
kind; the sound of droning propellers and whining sizens, and everything that
comes in with the new age.

Therein lies the strength of the present time, the new source of power. Not in
contorted formiets, mot in fear and trembling, mot in sentimentality, nor m

1 The explanation of the Amsteflaan facades, on which hostile crttica have relied
so heavily in their attacks on the Amsterdam School, ia given by J. P. Mieraa in
Wendingen (Amsterdam, 1923, VI, p. 3).

"1919, VI, p. 16,

routine fishing in the ocean of old forms, but in convenience, amplitude, vaat-

ness and cleanliness shall the new art become the language of today.

The visual complement to this quasi-Futurist writing was Wijdeveld’s
Groote Volkstheater project. ‘This would have altered a whole quarter of
Amsterdam quite as drastically as anything that Marinetti could have done
to Venice, since it would have obliterated most of the Vondelpark, partly
under the theatre and its flanking wings, and partly under an enormous
approach avenue that was to begin near the Leidseplein and enter the fore-
court of the theatre at the point where it crossed an extension af the Emma-
laan. Its length of almost a kilometre was to be flanked by skyscrapers up to
thirty stories high, boat-shaped in plan with their major axes at right
angles to the avenue. Though formally exciting, and impressive in scale,
with its tower-blocks marching into the heart of five-atorey Amsterdam,
the scheme does not bear close examination, particularly in connection
with such technical matters as foundations and circulation.

It seems doubtful if any member of the school, even de Klerk, was really
capable of designing on this scale, and most of the energy of Amsterdam
architects continued to go into residential work, either projected or com-
pleted. Outside de Kierk’s designs, this residential work, particularly the
villas, has a highly distinctive character—the partnerships of Vorkink
Wonmseer, and Eibink and Snellebrand, not to mention such independents
as Margit Kropholler, all produced work that was characterised by a most
erudite eclecticism, and a literally plastic sense of plasticity. The formal
borrowings included not only elements from Poelzig, Mendelsohn, Chiat-
tone, and other sources that have since been loosely termed ‘Expressionist’,
but also complete figurative envelopes—there is 2 well-known house by
Krophoiler shaped like a Noah’s Ark, and van Doesburg once complained
of another house (not traceable} in the form of a tram. The sense of plas-
ticity, however, seems to have no antecedents, except possibly in Poelzig’s
studio practice, for it derives its marked character from the practice of
doing the primary sketching of designs in three-dimensions and in soft
plastic materials like clay and modelling wax, The resultant buildings
though often quite compactly planned, give an impression of amoebic
sprawl, with their curved plan-forms and walls of varying thickness, and
were usually roofed with massive lids of thatch, which proves very amen-
able to design of this sort.

This mode of design hes a long way from the pure planes and masses
praised by Oud, yet the material Oud envisaged as producing these pure
forms, was admired by at least one of these designers of amoebic villas,
EFibink, as suitable to his own mode of design, What is even more remark-
able, in view of what Is usually supposed about the superficiality of Amster-
dam as against the structurality of de S#jl, is the fact that Eibink discusses
this material—reinforced concrete—only as a structural means, and doea
not refer, as Oud does, to its visual character. For Eibink, the use of rein-

forced concrete is a means of liberating architecture from additive, inor-
ganic, post-and-lintel design. As he wrote in Wendingen in 1919.

For the character of concrete, i.¢. its being cast in one piece, becomes an

element of much richer meaning through reinforcement, since reinforced con-

erete facilitates the bringing of forces from all sides and directions into equilib-
rium at will, By this token, concrete changes from dead stuff to living organism

... one builds no more in the zestricted sense of assembling or piling elementa

together,

However, little concrete, if any, was used in these villas, so that in material
as well as exterior plasticity, they represent the Wendingen group’s closest
approach to the work of Mendelsohn. A comparison of these villas with
Mendelschn’s Etnsteiniurm is instructive, because it indicates the bases of
the suggested alliance, as well as one of the differences on which it
foundered. In both cases the exterior is conceived as if the building were
composed of a soft plastic material that had been manipulated by a giant
hand; in the case of the Atusteintzrm: and most of the villas the material is,
in fact, brick cut and rendered over to resemble concrete, though the sug-
gestion 1s present that the material actually ts concrete. But the planning
of the Ermsteinturm is symmetrical, and based on an Academic apparatus of
minor and major axes, whereas the villas are extremely a-formal and anti-
symmetrical in plan, and represent one of the excesses of ‘dynamism’ that
Mendelsohn could not accept in Amsterdam architecture.

The first approach to Mendelsohn came, in any case, from Wijdeveld,?
not from the villa-designers, and was inspired by an exhibition of Mendel-
sohn’s sketches at Paul Cassirer’s gallery in Berlin in 1919. Though their
creator, then thirty-two, was almost unknown, these sketches made a for-
midable impression at the time, and Wijdeveld invited Mendelsohn to come
to Amsterdam to lecture to Archttectura et Amicitia (the formal organisation
of which Wendingen was the organ) and to assemble material for a special
issue of the magazine, The impact of the sketches is not difficult to under-
stand—though rooted in the work of pre-War masters like Poelzig and
Olbrich, in much the same way that Wendingen was rooted in Berlage, they
had an atr of excitement and zest about them that was missing from the
more placid work of Amsterdam, The difference scems mostly attributable
to the difference of generation—in the direct sense that most of the
Wendingen group were a little older than Mendelsohn anyhow, and in the
less direct, but more important, sense of the point in Mendelsohn’s career
at which the War intervened. The Amsterdam architects preserved their
links with the pre-War world and earlier masters unbroken, but not only
had the War interrupted that continuity for everyone in Germany, but it
had begun when Mendelschn was only twenty-seven and only just estab-
lished in practice. He had not, therefore, even any substantial body of pre-+

*The narrative of events leading up to Wijdeveld's invitation is given by
Arnold Whittick in his book on Mendelsohn, which also quotea the most interesting
passages from his correspondence of the period,

War work of his own to look back on, and his wartime experiences had their
effect on a mind not yet settled; a mind, like that of many of his German
contemporaries, that was still far from settled five years after the Armistice,
and he was to go on developing after most of the Wendingen designers had
lost their drive.

As a result he handles his pre-War themes with a freshness they were
lasing, and with the advantage of having had four years in which to revise
and revalue them without having to commit himself to anything more than
paper sketches. Executed between 1914 and 1917 and then resumed in
Ig1g9 in a second series that continued for the rest of Mendelsohn’ life,
these sketches form a remarkable body of work by any standards, and the
first set, alone, would be sufficient to establish him as one of the more
remarkable architectural talents of the twentieth century. Though he him-
self provided little in the way of explanation of them, and subsequent
critical exegesis by others has not been very helpful, it is possible to go
some way in establishing their sources and their meaning. One of the most
striking, for a car-body factory, is also one of the easiest to decipher.
Reading between the illustrations to a lecture he gave in Berlin in 1919
(and later, in Amsterdam), one may identify the sources of the overhead
gantry cranes in overhead railways that he had seen, and the dipylon end-
structure in Olbrich’s Darmstadt exhibition gateway of 1908. (Oibrich was
an architect for whom he had a special regard, as the leader who might
have delivered the Wiener Sezession from its own weaknesses.)

But whoever locks at this sketch cannot fail to be impressed by the way
in which the building seems to strain forward along its major axis. This
effect Mendelsohn called dynamism, but the word has broader connotations
than the dynamism, inherent in certain forms, proposed in the Manifesto
of Futurist architecture, and apparent as a kind of ‘excelsior’ in some of
Sant’Elia’s sketches. Mendelsohn's definition of dynamism varied, and
although he seems at times to suggest that it is more than an expression of
the internal pattern of stresses in a building, most of his direct definitions
do not really go beyond such a concept, and in the case of the car-body
factory he explicitly means only the expression of internal forces.

This sketch of a bodywork factory derives its dynamism fully from the forces
in its steel construction. Fhe row of gantries, indicated as iattice trusses, draws
the forms together sharply at the highest levei, while at the same time the corner-
blocks nod forward. That is, the loads transmitted through the gantries are
absorbed by the tie-girder structures in the corner-towers.

Not the least important revelation of this passage is that it proves to deal
with a structure in tension, a concept that seems to have had Little interest
for architects even after the War, let alone 1914 when this sketch was
made. Only in Russia, after the Revolution, was there much enthusiasm for
structures of this kind, and they seem to have been quite beyond the com-
orehenaion of the Dutch architects with whom Wideveld’s invitation

52. Hendrixus
Peter Berlage.

Main Hall of the
Beurs, Amsterdam,
after 1900: a dawn-
to-earth
Rationalism,

almast Gothic-
revival in character,
recalling the virtues
of fifty years earlier.
54. Frank Lioyd
Wright. Office
block of the Larkin
Company, Buffalo,
N.Y., 1905: an
achievement so far
outof step with even
progressive
architectural
thought at the tume,
that Berlage was
probably the only
Eurepean

architect who could
appreciate it.

=) ag

NS iP

“itt y Lal regi

irae


APONNEMENT GG) a WE AvRes van ae:
1 VOORUITBETFA- = a ] DAGTIE+ be

L'4G SIN NERLAAD i | | agalauwar
2.59 GUITEXNLARD . | r | || fF Lees. Ae a
Deo ER ee MAANOBLAD VOOR DE BEELDENDE Hagms tiirt
NONCES WENDE VAKKEN, REDACTIE THEO VAN DOES- a7 DELFT,

MEN ZICH TOT BURG. UITGAVE X. HARMS TIEPEN. te. tee'en

lt FER RANE. OCTOZER NEGENTIZFHHORGDEROLTEVENTIER.

TER iNLEIDING.

Gr cedscbritne wil sur cence bidrage tor de ontwikkeling wan her niewwe 3 ie.
beware Hee wil den omedernen mensch ontvankelijk maken voor het nieuwe. in de
Beeldende Kune: Fier wil segenower de archaistixche veewarring -- het moderne barek” —-
dco lagi che begeneclen atellem van een mjpenden stil, gebaseerd op zuivere verhouding warn |
ledges en vitdrekkingsrmeddelen Fler wal de huidige denkrichiingen betrefTende de nieuw:
berldimg cic. boewel in weren geli:k. zich crafhankeli;k van elkadr antwikkeld hebbets,

EES ert fen.

De Redane zat her hieshoven cmschreven doef rachien te beretken door den werkeligk.
magernen kunsiensar, dee eeis khan badcagen tet de herverming van het aesthetiach besef
en de beaunweording der beefdende kum aan het woord te laren. Waar het publiek-
nog ntct can de nituwe deeldingschoonheid toe is, words het de tak van den vakmag
het schoonhedsbewustzin bi den leek wakker 1¢ maken. De werkeliik moderne, — di
bewaste, kunstenaar heeft een dubbele rorping. Ten eectte : her rein-beeldende kuneteerle:
voort te brengen. ten tweede: her publiek voor de schoonheid der reine beeldende
kunst ontvankelyk te maken, Hiecuoor is cen tidschrift van msemen aard ak
gewerden. Te mecr, czar de apenbace kritiek i gebreke bleef her re koe aan schoonhekde
oorvankelyktcid voor de aburacte kurstopenbaring, aan ve vullen. Tor dit laaure zal de
Redacie de vakfieden zelf an staat steflen.

Dit tpdschrife za! terdoor een inniger contact scheppen huschen kunstenaar en pubbiek
en onnchken de beoclenaars der verschillende beeldende vakken Door den modemen
kunstenaar over zim eigen vak aan het woord te Luen zal het vooroordec!, ak zou de:
moderne werkman volgens vooropgestelde theorieén werken, verdwijnen. Integendeet. Fler
zal Siiken. dar her nieuwe hunsiwerk niet voortkomt yit a priori aangenomen thearinén,
maar juist andersam, dat de beginselen voortviceien un de beeldende arbeid.

Het zal zoodeende de mogeliikheid voorbereiden cener verdiepte kunsicultuur, gegrond op
gemeenschappeliike delichaming van het nieuwe beeldende kunstbewustziin, Zoodra
de kunsenaars in de verschillende beckdende vakken sot de erkenrung zullen hemen, dat
Zi] i principe aan elkass gelih zn, dat ze eene algemeene taal te spreken hebben.

54. Theo van Doesburg and
Wilmos Huszar. Opening page
of the first issue of de Suyi,
1917. Huszar’s logutype in the
title is in @ manner which wes
commen to other painters of
the Sif group, and net far
removed from:

55- Theo van Deesburg. Black
and white composition, 1918:
this in its turn can be related

to fragments of Mondriaan’s
so-called ‘Plus and Minus
Compositions '—genuine
stylistic unity underlay the
foundation of de Sti.


66. Rob van UHoff. Villa at Huis ter Heide, completed

rgté: the first cancrete-framed villa by a modern
architect, in aatyle derived from first-hand
acquaintance with the work of Wright.

57. Jan Wils, Restaurant, de Dubbele Sleutel, rg1g:
Wrightian architecture in brick, derived at second hand
by way of Berlage’s writings.


58, $9.J. J. P. Gud. Projects for Strandboulevard (seaside housing), 1917, and a small factory,
i919, The rectangulariry of the forms, though different in character in each, 3s in contrast te
6o. 61. Michel de Klerk. Post Office on the Zaanstraat, Amsterdam, 1917; and Theo van det
Vijdeveld. Valkstheater Project, before 1921. Curvilinear plasticity and elaborately modelled
surfaces of the Amsterdam school, :


62. Eibink and Snellebrand. Project fora villa, 1920: freedom
of planning among the younger members af the Wendingen
circle was in advance of anything else in Europe at this time.
63. Eric Mendelsohn, ‘The Einstein tower, Potsdam, rgtg—
1ga1: the canonical building of Expressionist architecture.
Mendeisohn's Dutch friends never equalled it, he himself
abandoned this style almost immediately.


64. Erie Mendelsohn. Project for a car-hody factory, rong
or later: although commoniy written off as Expressionist
fantasy this project embudies important structural ideas
that Alencelsalin expounded much later, when describing
his concept of dynaraism,

Eric Mendelsohn, Projects for a film-studio, above,
crematorium, below, and goods station, bottom; from
the same notebook as the car-body factory.


Cw

H 65. Aldi Finzz:.
Faleurs Abstraits,
rqz0: this three-
dimensional collage
with scientific

retensions hy an

talian dadaist gives a
fair idea of the width
of de Srijl’s interests
in its second phaae.
66, 67. Viadimir
Malevitech. Funda-
mental Suprematiat
elements, 1g 84: and
Gerrit Thomas
Rietveld. Chair (first
version), 1917. The
central interests of de
Sayl remained
constructive, but
fused into an inter-
national Elementarist
aesthetic that had
been anticipated by
Malevitsch and
Rietveld.


68, 69, Giaccomo Matté-T ruceo. Rooftop
test track of the Fiat factory, Turin, 1920-
1923; and Werner Graeff. Projeet fora
motorecycle, 1923.

yo, Alart Stam.
Competition project for
a glass and concrete
office block in
Kénigsbery, 1923: the
use of Sant’ Elian set-
back facades (cf. fig. 46)
is another demonstration
of persistent Futurist
influence on the G-group
in Berlin.


#1, El Lissitsky and Mart
Stam. 'Wolkenbipel’ project,
1924: administrative blacks,
straddling umportant
thoroughfares on splayed legs
with external passenger lifts—
a highly sophisticated
descendant of Sant’ Flia’s
town-planning ideas, bur see
also fig. 73 below,

52,73. Wesnin Brothers. Project fur the Leningrad Pravda offices, 1923, and El
Lissitsky 'Wotkenblige]’ project, 1924. The Pravda building was regarded by
Lissitsky as a canonical building of Constructivism, and like his own first version
of the ‘Wolkenbiigel’ had an upright and rectilinear structure.

74. Ladowski Psycho-
technical Laboratory,
modei study for an
airport, 1923: extension
of the idea of Lissitsky's
abstract Prove object
into large-scale planning.


95, Cor van Eesteren (with Theo van Doesburg),
Prize-winning design for the reconstruction of

Unter den Linden, Berlin, 1925: a recombination of
the ideas of Elementarism with the academic

discipline af Elementary compusition. ‘The result, at
many points, anticipates the methods of prouping large
blocks that emerged in the 1g@50's.

76. Frederick
Kiesler, Cité dans
Espace (version
shown inthe Austrian
Pavilion, Exposition
des Arts Decoratifs},
Paris, 1925:
described by its
designer as
architecture
elementarizée, it
represents the fullest
exploitation of
Elementarist ideas nf
space,

77. Gernit Thomas
Ruetveld, Schroeder
House, Utrecht,

1925 : the only jarge
ptrtmanent stricture
to emerge from the
penod of greatest
Elementarist activity:
the balconies and roof
structure extend into
the surrounding
space in a spectacular
but orderly
Elementarist manner,


78, Marcel Breuer. Project for a theatre at Kharkov. 1930: Baukaus schemes
of the Jate ewenties, such as this, show the supercesston of Dutch Etemen-
tarist influence by that of the Russian constructivists.

79, Mart Stam, Chair in steel tube and webbing, 1926; and Mareel Breuer.
Chair in steel tube with caned back and seat: apain it was under Russian
influence that Mart Stam produced the design that liberated chairs from
Rietveld's Elementarist rapasse, and made possible the Breuer type that

has become a ‘twentieth-century classic’.

brought Mendelsohn in contact, Whatever their feelings about him, and
it is clear that Mendelsohn was well received, it is equally clear that he
had grave misgivings about what he saw. Instead of warming toward the
dramatic plasticity of the Wendingen circle, he reacted away from it, toward
Oud and his connection in Rotterdam, though he was as far from accepting
their position as he was from accepting Amsterdam’s. In a letter to his
wife he opted for a middle attitude.

Certainly the primary element is function, but function without sensibility

remaing mere construction. More than ever I stand by my programme of recon-

ciliation ... Rotterdam will pursue the way of pure construction with a deathly

chill in its veing, and Amsterdam will be destroyed by the fre of its own

dynamics. Function plus dynamics is the challenge.
Although he speaks of his reconciliatory programme as something he stands
by, and therefore already in existence, the evidence of his sketches and
completed buildings suggests that it may not have been in existence very
long, for it is clear that the Dutch visit preceded a major upheaval in his
manner of conceiving buildings, which finally emerges, as in his factory at
Luckenwalde or the Sternfeld House, completely stripped of its bulging
plastic forms, disciplined down to straight-edged, squere-arrised forms,
mostly horizontal and vertical in disposition. This period of transition was
completed by 1923, when these two buildings were also completed, but had
begun as earty as 1920 when the designs for the hat factory at Luckenwalde
were put in hand, and its transitional character is manifested by its exten-
sive use of oblique and diagonal forms, tapered columns and beams; forms
and structures ta which he was not to revert for almost three decades,
leaving this factory as unique in his work of the Twenties as it is remarkable
in the quality of its design.

However, it is extremely difficult to find any direct reflection of all this
tumult of ideas in his few published writings, just as he never describes
himself by the epithet most commonly coupied with his name and work;
Expressionist. He uses the term once, but in such a way as to imply that it
is simply another extremist position (like Constructivist) that he cannot
accept, and he was introduced to Wendingen readers 23 an Expressionist by
implication, and that is all, On the other hand, it must be noted that in
1919 he expressed opinions that could be construed as Expressionist

The inner excitements of our time, its impulse toward new departures in all

provinces of our common life, compel the artist to bring bimmself forward in his
work and represent his own will

But the artist is to do this in the context of his community

But, more and more, his personality is taken up with the rule of responsibility
te the new conumunity, hie path more strictly mapped out as his gwn demands
become greater

and architecture is more conditioned by its community responsibilitie
than other arts

As ever, architecture has the power of most visibly recording the formal urges
of a period, so today the outcome of this battle (sc7. against past styles) lies in
the hands of the people as a whole.
The introductien of philosophical and art-historical concepts of this order
is net quite unique for the periad, since van Doesburg also employs ideas
like Zeitgeist and Wille sum Stil, but it is certainly unusual in architectural
writing by architects, and it is followed by an equally unusual piece of dis-
guised Semper (or Berlage)
When forms break down, they are replaced by fresh ones, that have existed all
the time, burt only now come to the fore,
but the occasion for this rediscovery of lost forms is one on which most of
his contemporaries were agreed
For the special conditions of architecture, the way in which the Zeitgerst reshuffles
our aims is signilicant: new task through the changed building needs of Trans-~
port, Economy, Religion; new constructional possibilities through new materials,
glass, iron, concrete,
However, if this is familiar ground, his illustrations of good new structure
are unfamiliar, and may be epitomised by his selection of an aircraft (in
itself common post-Futurist practice) of an obviously aviomorphic type,
the Rumpler 7aube, with its dove-like wing plan, instead of the regular
Euclidian forms of the biplanes preferred by his contemporaries of the
other persuasion. Also in contrast to them is his sharp criticism of Bruno
Taut’s 1913 Stahhverksverband Pavilion for disguised Hellenism, and
even sharper criticism of the Turbinenfabrik, where, he says, Behrens
papers over the expressiveness of the hail with the formality of a many-faceted
temple-pediment, belittles the plastic fullness of the corner-towers with hori-
zontal jointing grooves, distorts and contradicts their static content , .. claps
part on part, building on building, whereas organic construction signifies un-
breakable relationships, consistent growth and uninterrupted contours.
This puts him a very long way from the architects in the mainstream of
German development, with their additive structures and their general
reverence for Behrens, but it leaves him still within reach of the opinions
of Eibink, neted above, But with the lecture he gave in 1923 to Architectura
et Amicitia, he moves ott mto a world of his own, although both text and
illustrations show that he was well-informed on the wark of his contem-
poraries in France, as well as Holland and Germany. The quality of his new
opinions, which were to be the last he committed to print for a long time,
can best be given by the following passage of almost continuous quotation
(and, in reading it, scorn at his views on Relativity should be tempered
by the reflection that of ali the aesthetic theorists who have mangled
Einstein's opinions, Mendelsohn alone knew Einstein well at first hand as
a person}

Since the recognition that the two conceptions hitherto kept separate by
Science—Matter and Energy—are only different conditions of the same basic


stuff, that nothing in the Universe is without Relativity to the Cosmos, withour
connection with the whole—aince then Engineers have abandoned the theary
of dead material, and given themselves to the dutiful service of Nature. In the
most elementary conditions they find regularly-related connections, and their
previous arrogence gives way to joyful participation in creative process. The
machine, so far the subservient agent of uncreative exploitation, becomes a
constructive element in a new living organism. We owe its existence somewhat
to the generosity of some unknown agency, as it might be the inventive pleasure
of some constructional genius, but at the same time it originates as a necessary
by-product of progress, as need dictates. Ita real tusk is this; to satisfy the many
changing relationships between population figures and increased demand, be-
tween Industralisation and rising consumption, to bring itself to order and con-
trol its own effects.

Men of our time, out of the excitement of their high-speed life, can only find
compensation in relaxed horizontal forms. Only through a drive for effectiveness
can we master our unrest, anly at top speed will we conquer our haste. Then
will the spinning world stand still,

Unthinkable that this conquest, this mastery of natural elements be given up.
But the problem is; to make achoal-room learning ef it.

The child learns to telephone, and the grand order of number crumbles, great
distance dwindles to a little walk.

Technology is Handicraft, Laboratory is Workshop, the Inventor is Master.

The echoes of Futurism in the concluding sentences are confirmed by the
illustrations that accompany them, but there is little else here that can be
related to other contemporary streams of architectural thought, not even
to his Berlin Schoof contemporaries in their Expressionist phase. Indeed
there is not much that can be related to his own architectural practice, al-
though the matter/energy relationship is clearly related to the explanation
of dynamism quoted earlier, which comes from the same lecture, In any
case, the lecture was given in the year in which the periad of violent transi-
tion in his architecture ended, and should, perhaps be treated simply as
attempted verbalisation of the plastic ideas implicit in the very violent
sketches of that phase, His work does not cease to develop, but, although
curved forms reappear, they are not the soft organic curves of his early
work, but segments of circles, and they usually manifest themselves as
sharply arrised structural slabs. Walls remain vertical, surfaces hard and
shiny, he uses glass as lavishly as his other German contemporaries, and
he becomes a distinguished contributor to the body of work produced by
the Berlin School, marked out only by a slightly more personal idiom than
most of them employed,

By the time he finally moved away from what, for want of a better term,
must still be called Expressionism,‘ in 1923, other Berlin architects, like

* Attempts to define Expressionism have been avoided so far because the term
has always been so loosely used as to defy definition, The ideas quoted here can
be construed as Expressionist only because they put forward a concept that is
commonly associated with the work of painters like Kokoschka and Nolde, and
aculptors like Barlach, but it is very doubtful if this idea of self-expression waa very
widely entertained even by artists such as these whose style has later become the
touchstone of Expressionism. Again and again, since the word was first put into
circulation around 1911, it has been used to signify, purely and simply, work that is

Gropius and Mies van der Rohe, had also begun to abandon what little they
had taken up of it; Hugo Haring, whose Garkau farm buildings are one of
the masterpieces of the Expressionist phase, began to drop from the fore-
ground, and only Hans Scharoun was to maintain a persistently irregular
attitude to design. The dividing line between the two epochs is given by
the interval of time that separates the Friedrichstrasse and Chicago Tribune
skyscraper competitions, beth of which called up remarkable enthusiasm
and inventiveness among the progressive architects of Northern Europe,
including some of the best work of the outgoing, shortlived anti-Rationalist
phase, and equally good work from the protagonists of the alternative
approach, based on abstract, constructive art—the approach that finally
made the International Style truly international.

not old-fashioned, but dees not conform to the current progressive norma of the
time, There is practically no other sense in which the term can be made to atick to
the work of Poelzig, which seems never to have been intended to express anything
personal at all, and Mendelsohn is nearly always found to be expressing something
about the nature or contents of the building. Since the expression of the function
of the building is taken to be one of the touchstanes of the non-Expreassionist
approach, we may suspect that we sce here, a3 in so much twentieth-century
architectural polemics, one of those situations where an aesthetic standpoint is
defended by accusing the other party of abandoning a theoretical position that is,
in fact, common ground to both sides.


14: De Stijl: the International phase

THOUGH IT 18 impossible to draw a hard and fast line between the Dutch
and International phases of de Stil, in terms of theoretical writings or
artistic productions, the change in membership between 1920 and 1922 is
very marked indeed, and gives a fair picture of the transformation that was
in process. By the beginning of 1922 van der Leck, van Tongerloo, van
t'Hoff, Wils, Oud and Kok had left, and Huszar was about to leave, while
Mondriaan, established in Paris since 1919, was no longer a directly effec-
tive member, though he did not resign finally until 1925. Severini had also
lost contact, so that van Doesburg himself alone remained of the original
membership. ‘The new men who filled the gaps were very different from
those who had left.

Only two of them were Dutch, nwo were imaginary, one was German,
one was Russian, The Dutch pair were Gerrit Rietveld, who had been a
member since as early as 1918, but only now came to prominence, and Cor
van Eesteren, whom van Doesburg enrolled in Weimar in 1923. Both have
gained fame as architects though Rietveld seems to have entered the group
as a furniture-maker, and van Eesteren, far from being a convinced
Modernist when he met van Doesburg, was on his way to take up a Rome
scholarship. The two imaginary members were both pseudo-persons of
van Doesburg? in his Dadaist mood, I, K. Bonset and Aldo Camini, and it
was over these signatures that he made most of his purely literary contri-
butions to de Styl, The German was Hans Richter, a former Dadaist who
had turned to abstraction independently of the Dutch Movement, and the
Russian was El Lissitsky, the apostle of Constructivism to Western Europe.
The adherence of Lissitsky was brief, though important, and his place was
taken by two other members of the Berlin G group, Frederich Kiesler, the
Austrian theatrical designer, and Werner Graeff, an ex-student of the
Bauhaus who was later connected with the Werkbund, The fourth and
most celebrated member of G, Mies van der Rohe, never became a

* Even ‘van Doesburg’ was a pseudonym—his real name was C. E. M. Kupper,

member of de Styl, and van Doesburg's attitude to him is not clear,?

The varying background and activities of these new members are worth
noting, because they emphasise the degree to which the second phase of
de Stil differs from the first. No longer constrained by the exigencies
of War and restricted communications to faire école on the narrow stage of
Dutch art, van Doesburg could exercise his talents on a European scale.
From #919 onwards he travelled extensively, much as Marinetti had done,
visiting most of the active centres of progressive art in Germany, as well as
Prague, Paris, and certain other towns in France. In the process he estab-
lished contact with most of the leading figures in art whose ideas were at all
sympathetic to his, and the magazine, whose distribution became increas-
ingly international, reflects this new situation not only in a new format, but
in an increasing diversity of contents as well. Whereas, in the days of Oud
and Mondriaan, it had exhibited the fairly consistent doctrine discussed in
chapter 12, it now embraced Dadaism, late Futurism, Russian trends such
as Constructivism and Suprematism, and the various Parisian trends that
were associated with Léonce Rosenberg’s Effort Moderne connection, as
well as the new emergents in Berlin. It also published creative literary
work, commenly Dadaist or Futurist in tone, and not ali of it signed Bonset
or Camini, but centributed or quoted from outside sources.

However diverse these various tendencies may appear, they all had one
or more aspects in common with what de Stil had already thought or done,
and they extend and develop van Doesburg’s attitude to art and architec-
ture, without causing any major break or disturbance. Thus from the
Futurists, with whom he made direct contact even before the War was over,
he gained confirmation of his mechanolatry, and the idea of a liberated
typography, which begins to appear in de Stil in 1920. He also established
contact with the Valeri Plastici group, and thus with de Chinco, perhaps
the most surprising of his new connections, though he discusses de
Chirico’s paintings in terms of space, machinery and other themes that
were already familiar. By March 1920 he was in touch with the Section
d'Or group and L’Effort Moderne in Paris, whose interests in Cubism, and
machinery, and generally intellectual and progressivist attitude would
obviously appeal to him, and an eulogy of L'Esprit Neuvean appeared in
de Stil in February 1921. In the next two months he began to reprint
Dadaist texts, which seem to have appealed to him by their extremism,
their disgust with tradition and the past, and, most likely, their positive,

* He is supposed to have invited Mies to aubmit material, somewhere in the early
Twenties, for an exhibition at L’Effor! Moderne, but no work of his appeared in
that organisation’s magazine (which bore the same name}, From what one knows of
Léonce Rosenberg, who edited the magazine and ran the gallery, this would have
been an incredible omission if he had been aware of Mies’s work—iltustrations of
designs by Kiesler, for instance, began to appear as soon as they were available to
him. It is aleo worth noting that no work of Mies appeared in de Sig either, until
1928,

if perverse attitude to Rationalism. The films of Richter and Eggeling were
noticed in July of the same year—their Abstraction and ‘space-time’
qualities would obviously appeal—while the October issue contained a
reproduction of a painting by Fernand Leger, the first photograph of a
motor-car to appear in its pages, quaszi-Futurist poetry by Nicholas
Beaudouin, the Aufruf zur elementaren Kunst and quotations from a book
by the German architectural writer, Adolf Behne. The far ranging eclec-
ticisma and fore de vivre of this period is nicely symbolised by Aldo Fiozzi’s
Valeurs Abstraits which was reproduced in January 1921—a Dadaist three-
dimensional collage with a French title, made by an Italian ex-Futurist,
bearing the alarming ‘scientific’ injunction B 50,+H,0. Yet the most
significant item to appear, as far as future developments were concerned,
was the dufruf zur elementaren Kunst, whose importance will be discussed
later.

This phase of extension and exploration in van Doesburg’s career reaches
its climax in 1922, the year in which he published his most extended per-
sonal statement of aims, found himself confronted by the problem of the
Bauhaus, by the personality of Lissitsky, with whom he helped to organise
the Diisseldorf Congress of Progressive Artists, and with whom (and others)
he signed the foundation Manifesto of the Constructivist International.
The statement of aims is, in a good Berlagian tradition, the reprint of a
lecture given in Berlin, Jena and the Weimar Bauhaus late in 1921, under
the title of Der Wille stn Stil, and much of what he had te say under this
equally Berlagian heading was not very new. He rehearsed such established
de Stiji themes as the anathema on Individualism and Expressionism, the
opposition of nature and spirit, the analogies of mechanical and artistic
design, but in a new and rather laconic tone of voice, of a sort that had been
prophesied by Marinetti and, indeed, sound rather Marinettian

Ail that we used ta designate as Magic, Spirit, Love, ete. will now be efficiently

accomplished. The idea of the Miraculous, that primitive man made so free

with, wiil now be realised simply through electric current, mechanical control
of lighe and water, the technological conquest of space and time.
This laconic tone reaches its apotheosis in another document of 1922, the
Foundation Manifesto of the Constructivist International, which contains
the following remarkable disclaimer

‘This International is not the result of some humanitarian, idealistic or political

sentiment, but of that amoral and elementary principle on which science and

technology are based.
But beside these old sentiments in a new voice (though one suspects that
even the sentiments may have been shocking at the Bauhaus) Der [Wille zum
Sti does introduce two new themes of importance. One is the Machine
Aesthetic as such, the other is Elementarism. Of the former, van Doesburg

s2y8
Since it is cortect to say that culture in its widest sense means independence of

Nature, then we must not wonder that the machine «tands in the forefront of

our cultural will-to-style. . . . Consequently, the spiritual and practical needs

of our time are realised in constructive sensibility, The new possibilities of the

machine have created an aesthetic expressive of our time, that I once

‘the Mechanical Aesthetic’.
Since his examples are, among others, locomotives, cars, aeroplanes, etc,
he is not contributing anything very new except the blanket term to describe
the visual qualities that these objects had in common. But this blanket term
does appear to be a genuine innovation, dating back to an article in the
Bouwkundig Weekblad earlier in 1921, which is the former occasion to
which he refers. Conceivably the Futurists may have already been in pos-
session of the term before this, though Bragaglia’s Manifesto on the aubject
did not appear until 1925. Furthermore, a note in de Stijl by Enrico
Prampolini seems to imply that for him, at least, the word was a northern
discovery, made at the time of the Diisseldorf Congress which he attended.
The passage in which this occurs is worth noting, because it also seems to
imply that the Futurists consciously handed on the torch of mechanistic
aesthetics to these, nerth of the Alps, whom Prampolini groups as Con-
structivists (van Doesburg, Richter, Lissitsky, Eggeling and Moboly-

Nagy)

We teday—vwho have hymned and exalted the suggestive powers of the machine

as inspiration and fixed our sensations and plastic emotions in pioneer plastic

works—we see the first outlines of the new machine seathetic sketched on the

Blowing horizon... the first plastic expressions vouchsafed by a mechanical

COBMOZOny
The conjunction of ‘the mechanical aesthetic’ with ‘constructive sensibility"
and of ‘a new machine aesthetic’ with a list of artists termed ‘constructivist’
is symptomatic, if no more, of a growing feeling, which has much later
been codified as a definitive credo, that the art proper to a mechanical age is
Russian Abstract art, loosely termed Constructivist. As applied to the
work and theory of the year under review, the term is a confusing one,
since it has to stand for two opposing tendencies in Soviet art—the
idealistic approach of Gabo and Pevsner, later termed Constructivist, but
at that time, perversely enough, though like so many other Idealistic creeds,
known as Realist, and the other, anti-Idealist and anti-art, approach of
Lissitsky and his connection, which Lissitsky probably dubbed Con-
structivist in the same year of 1922. However, as far as the discussions and
writings of 1922 are concerned, the term Elementarist seems much more
to the point, since it was used by many of those involved (but not by Gabo
and Pevsner, who were not involved anyhow), was derived from the ideas
of Malevitsch, like many of the aesthetic practices, and genuinely identifies
what the various parties had in common.

Whatever the initial debt of the Elementarist idea to the Academic
tradition (cf. chapter 1) the word elements appears to have been in use in a
more or less Elementarist sense by Malevitsch by about 1915, when he


conceived of his Suprematist paintings as being composed of fundamental
suprematisi elerments*—simple geometric forms that are the basic units of his
composition. In this he may appear to stand very close to Guadet, but in his
sculpture and in the developing Elementarist tradition at large, an element
is only a structural part of any volume that really registera in the composi-
tion, and is usually restricted to a plain rectangular shape in itself—in van
Doesburg’s Elementarist paintings the ‘elements’ are the areas of colour,
or the frames around them, but not the coloured forms as a whole, and in
such examples of Elementarist architecture as Rietveld’s House at Utrecht,
the elements are the structure of the building, and not, as they would be
with Guadet, its functional volumes.

The idea of Elementarism seems to have reached Germany either directly
by way of Lissitsky when he came from Moscow in 1921, or in a more
roundabout way that included Puni and Meholy-Nagy. It is unlikely that
Lissitsky would not have known of such a concept if it were current, but it
must be noted that the Aufruf sur elementaren Kunst,4 to which reference
has already been made, was signed by Puni and Moholy-Nagy, as weil as
the ex-Dadaists Hausman and Arp, and seems to be the earliest record of the
word, This Aufruf contained the most succinct yet misleading definition
of Elementarism that ever appeared

Elementary is the art that does not philosophise, but is built out of its own
proper elements alone.

which is not so much 2 tautology, as an equation that could be rephrased
(given the necessary background knowledge) in the form: Elementarism
equals art made of Matevitsch’s elements minus Malevitsch’s aesthetic
philosophy, for the Elementarists’ elements did not, as the Suprematists’ did,
carry a load of empathetic values,’ but were simply units of structure and
space-division, This absence of symbolic or mystical overtones is in line
with van Doesburg’s new laconic manner, but probably derives from the
two Dadaists among the Elementarists, both of whom had been members
of the Zurich Dada group, with its notorious contempt for metaphysics and
‘spiritual values’.

Though the paintings of Moholy-Nagy afford the earliest conscious
examples of Elementarist art, and Kiesler’s Cité dans P Espace (discussed
later in this chapter) is the mest spectacular example of Architecture
Elemeniarisde as he bimself called it, the most striking example of an Ele-
mentarist structure was conceived and built before the word existed—the

* The dates of Malevitach’s early paintings, like those of many other pioneers of
Abstract painting, have been rendered extremely suspect by the activities of critics
eager to prove that their own choices were the ‘first’ to produce Abstract art. The
date given here is the latest reasonable alternative.

« This Elementarist manifesta was reprinted in de Sigi, TV, p. 156.

*Thus, Malevitsch’s drawings of the War years often have titles such as
‘Sensation of Universal Space’, ‘Sensation of Flight’, and so forth,

earliest version of Gerrit Rietveld’s anm-chair, which was illustrated in
de Stil in 1919, but seems to have been designed as early as 1917. Curiously
enough, the germs of this conception must have come from Wright, as
represented to Rietveld by van t’Hoff. The form, a ‘Morris chair’ with a
high plank back, is Wrightian, as is the use of plain machine-cut rails, such
as Wright had valued in his own furniture as

The straight-line clean-cut forms that the machine can render far better than

would be possible by hand.*

But, to this Wrightian origin, had been applied precisely that type of
European abstracting thought that Oud had identified as Wright’s opposite.
The functions of the chair have been analysed, discriminated, reduced to
their ‘essentials’—the sitting and enclosing functions are served by four
planks (back, seat and two sides) that are visually separated from one an-
other, from the two planks (arms) that serve to support the occupant’s
arms, and from the network of plain rails that serves the supporting
functions, and matntain the various elements in their correct relative
positions in space.

The phrase ‘positions in space’ is advisedly used here—immediate com-
mentary on this chair in the pages of de Sti has two themes; the inviolate
and unmutilated condition of each structural member, none of which is
mortised or rabbeted by another, and the spatiality of the total structure,
Rietveld himself insists that

above all, the whole stands free and clear in space

and van Doesburg goes further, and having acclaimed such furniture as
‘the abstract-real sculpture of our future interior’, devoted to it in volume
IIl of de Stijl, a curious poem, in which its mechanistic and spatial qualities
are contrasted with those of a painting by de Chirico

In the ‘Solitude’ of de Chirico.
in the foreground mathematical man—space-master, space-mastered
With every plane, angle and point around at or near him
a spatial measurement symbolised
SPACE ANATOMY
and in contrast to mathernatical man caught in his space web
a sober open space with a factory and a right-angled pipe at hand
Rietveld's chair: unwilful but inexorable effect on empty space
and in contrast:
FUNCTION
TO SIT
CHAIR

maternal necessity set against rich, continuous and vast creation of open space.
CHAIR
Silent eloquence of a machine

or, in other words, the chair is, and affects, what the painting can only
represent or symbolise, a functional structure in three-dimensional space, It

* This, again, from fn the Cause of Architecture,

is clear that in this context the concept of space is considerably more than of
a void containing objects, and it seerns to come nearer ta a three-dimen-
sional grid—something more than the continuum discussed in chapter 4,
in that it appears to contain a regular, measurable, imaginary structure, an
idea that may have been put into circulation among de Styi by the Futurist
Azari in his note on the Futurist Aerial Theatre, which describes aircraft
climbing around an invisible spiral staircase . . . gymnastics on the invisible
trapezes of the atmosphere
and clearly implies same form of structure in space, if only the co-ordinates
of a three-dimensional graph. Something similar ts implied in the universal
geometry of horizontals and verticals that Mondriaan took over from
Schoenmaekers, while the key concept in Mondriaan’s view of space (aa
expressed in his essay Le Néoplasticisme), of the rectangle as a form
. where lines cross or touch tangentially, fut do not cease to continue Chis
italics)
is given visible substance by the structural elements of Rietveld’s chair,
where the lines, embodied as the rails of the structure, do indeed form rect-
angles by touching tangentially, and continuing an arbitrary distance
beyond the point of interception. Space in Elementarist art is, indeed, con-
tinuous and epen, and the work of art is a structure that makes its rect-
angularity manifest by giving bedy to its grid-lines and the planes and
volumes between them, and this is still true even when the grid, as in some
van Doesburg paintings of the mid-Twenties, has been skewed out of the
Though such concepts were to be put to very effective use at the Bauhaus
later in the decade, they seem to have been unknown there at the time van
Doesburg first came in contact with it—an encounter that, for a variety
of reasons, was 2 conspicuous disappointment to him. The facts of the case
have been effectively obscured by a highly circumstantial version of events
put about by his widow, according te which Gropius and van Deesburg
met at the house of Bruno Taut in 1919, and Gropius there made van Does-
burg the offer of a teaching post at the Bauhaus. When he arrived in Weimar
to take this up (as late as 1921, for some unexplained reason} he was refused
the post by Gropius. This version is denied by the other side, and regarded
a3 improbable by those who knew both men, but the truth is still hard to
come at, and the oscillations of van Doesburg’s attitude are not easy to
explain, It is true, however, that his first attacks do not begin until after he
had visited Weimar, in the May 1922 issue of de Sty. Qn the other hand,
they consist of the kind of observations that a convinced anti-Expressionist
Stijlkunstenaar could have made without having been crossed by the
Bauhaus administration—confronted by Itten’s Freudian pedagogy, by the
Vorkurs with its preoccupation with natural materials, and remembering
the newly completed Sommerfeld house outside Berlin, it would need very
little more to provoke van Doesburg to the magnificent jibe

As the church is a parody of Christianity, so is Gropius’s Bauhaus in Weimar

a parody of the new creativity... not only here, but elsewhere (e.¢. the anthro+

posophical art-humbug of Dornach) the mew artistic expression degenerates to

a sort of ultra-barogue.’

Yet he had reasons to be friendly to the Bauhaus: he had a friend, Lyonel
Feininger established there from an early date, an old admiration and a new
acquaintance—Kandinsky and Mcholy-Nagy—both joined the staff in this
period, and the programme of the school had always been as anti-individua-
listic as his own. He had welcomed the foundation of the Bauhaus in
1gig, and in 1924, after he had left Weimar and moved to Paris, he spoke
in favour of the school and against its detractors. It is worth noting too,
that only on one other occasion did a hostile note on the Bauhaus appear in
de Siji, and not over van Doesburg’s own signature, and that, apart from
these two instances, the hostility seems to have been largely retrospective,
if not actually posthumous. Conceivably he had expected to galvanise staff
and students alike by his lecture, only to find that to the student body he
was just anether visiting eccentric,* and so conceived a disappointment at
the lack of results that had grown into a resentment by the time that he
tried to rewrite the history of Modern art, in 1927, as the history of the
universal and exclusive influence of de Sriji.* He was, almost certainly, the
first of the Abstractionists who helped to alter the Bauhaus outlook, but
he was only the first, and the real credit for the alteration must go to
Moholy-Nagy (of whom he was reported to be jealous).

At all events, his quarrel with the Bauhaus was less that it was too arty,
as some of his younger colleagues seem to have thought, than that it had
opted for the wrong kind of art. An outright rejection of ‘art’, in this con-
text, is generally credited to the G group, but although their views on the
subject were tough, they shaded off from a hard core of rejection towards
less absolute attitudes, and even the determinism of its most determined
anti-artists had qualifications. The hard core is represented by Mies van
der Rohe, taking his stand on something very like nineteenth-century
Rationalism {see chapter 19) and declaring

We reject ail aesthetic speculation, all doctrine, all formalism

but the slogans and polemical paragraphs that speckle the newspaper-sized
pages of G give a more liberal, though equally emphatic, impression. An
overall artistic creativity was permitted, even if the separate ‘arts’ were
despised.

’ De Styl, V, column 71 {after the magazine changed over to a wide-page for-
mat, the type continued to be set to the old width, two calurnns to a page, each
column numbered separately),

* On visiting eccentrics at the Bauhaus, including van Doesburg, with an alter-
native date for his tecture, see Helmut von Erffa's article ‘Bauhaus First Phase’ in the
Architectural Remew (London, August 1954).

1 This extraordinary performance, which van Doeshurg appears to have had in
mind for some time beforchand, appeared in the jubilee number of 1927, which was,
of course, de S#ijl’s tenth, not twenty-fifth, birthday.

The opposition between the new creativity (in art) and the old, restricted art,

ig principal. We do not intend to bndge it over, but to deepen it
and this, clearly, is simply a rewording of the regular de Stzl contrast
between old art and new.

Similarly, the interpretation of mechanical determirusm has to be wide
enough to include something almost mystical. Werner Graeff, reputedly
the most tough-minded of the group, whe is supposed to have left the Bau-
haus in disgust, can be found asserting

Uninfluenced by the methods of mechanical technology, the new and greater

technology begins—the technclogy of tensions, invisible motions, action-at-a

distance, and speeds unimaginable now in 1922.

This appears to be Futurism reworded, and it is to be noted that in the
same issue of G' an extended and enthusiastic review of Lindner and Stein-
metz's Ingenteurbauten (cf. chapter 5) has to take second place to pictures
{the first of many in many different publications all over Europe) of
Giacomo Matte-Trucco’s Fiat factery at Turin, with its test-track for cars
on the roof, the most nearly Futurist building ever built. It is clear that G
opinions were very various in origin,?° but they have one constant theme—
elementary creativity, elementary means of creation, the elementarism that
had been brought to Berlin by Lissitsky.

Born in 1890, Lissitsky was one of the great ‘ideas-men’ of the Modern
Movement. He may have had little to contribute that was original, but his
impact, as the chief agent in bringing Russian developments to the atten-
tion of architects in Western Europe was of great importance. Not only did
he bring fresh ideas of Cubo-Futurist extraction to minds that were already
prepared for them by other similar developments, but he also enjoyed a
prestige of a kind also enjoyed by an Ehrenburg, a Mayakowsky, a Proko-
fieff, as a species of ambassador at large of the new Soviet culture that
appeared to many at that time almost as Futurism made fact. In addition
he was endowed with an extremely persuasive, though quite unspectacular
personality, and, in Western Europe at least, he gave far more than he
received—there is, for instance, no perceptible de Sz! influence on him,
but his mfluence upon even van Doesburg is made clear by the fact that
in 1922, almost a cornplete issue was given over to his ideas, and another
issue made over in its entirety to reproductions of his graphic work.

Both writings and pictures were devoted to the concept of Prown, which
was in many ways, his most characteristic contribution to the common
pool of Abstractionist ideas. Proun is merely a Russian word for ‘object’
but in Lissitsky’s hands it takes on a number of specialised collateral mean-
ings, like the word abstract in Mondriaan’s usage. Proua occupies! a

2 G1 was the more productive of slogans and ideas, G2 of illustrationa of executed
works and projects by the group's members,

4 These quotations are from the version of Proun that appeared im de Szjl, V,
column 82.

specific place in the history of creative design

... the halting place on the road of development of the new creativity, planted
in soil manured by the carpse of painting and its artists.

Even pure painting is classed among the dead

.,. though here the artist began his own transformation—from the imitator of

objects to the creator of a new world of objecta
and this is a rejection of the ‘nen-objectivity’ of Malevitsch, to whom he
was otherwise somewhat indebted. In this new world of objects, Proun
was to be the seminal object

Prown begins on the flat plane, goes on to the construction of three-dimensional

models, and beyond that to the construction of every object of our common

Pes Proun supersedes painting and its artists on the one hand, the machine

and its engineers on the other, proceeds to the construction of space, organises

its dimensions by means of its elements, and creates a new, manifold yet

unified, image of our nature.
Proun, in fact, is a sort of aesthetic prototype for something very like a
gigantic Berlagian Gesamtkunstwerk, complete with its own version of
Eenheid in Veetheid. The emphasis on space-manipulation as the primary
function of Proun is perhaps the newest thing, apart from the claim te
hegemony over technology, in the Proun programme, but the actual ap-
proach te the consideration of space, if one may judge by what Lissitsky
wrote later about the ‘psychotechnical laboratory’ run by his associate
Ladowski, was cast in the rather Academic framework of ‘Mass, space,
plane, proportion, rhythm’,

Some further aspects of Proun seem seif-contradictory; thus, Lissttsky
condemns in one place

..» The narrow, limited, isolated and dismembered disciplines of Science
yet he seerns to be able to accept elsewhere in the same document an almost
Choisyesque Rationalism

Material becomes form through construction.
Conternporary demands and econamy of means need one another

Proua is creative formation {mastery of space) by means of economical construc-

tion with revalued materials.
But this last is, on examination, a most important proposition, for it is one
of the beginnings of the idea that the formal disciplines of the Modern
Movement are in some way the product of a philosophy resembling that of
nineteenth-century Rationalism. Whether or not they were so produced is
not the point at this juncture, but the art and the writings of Lissitsky were
probably the first to bring them together. As for Lissitsky himself, this
Rationalistic approach was what he later called ‘Constructivism’, and under
this name became more or less the official credo of Soviet architecture in
the Twenties (although his ideas had been suppressed in painting in 1921).

The pioneer Constructivist structure was, for him, the Leningrad-Pravda
building projected by the brothers A, and W. Wesnin in 1924

The building is characteristic of an age that thirsts after glass, iron and concrete.

All the accessories that a metropolitan street imposes on a bujlding—illustratians,

publicity, clock, loudspeaker, ¢ven the lifts inside—are all drawn into the design

as equally important parts and brought ta unity. This is the aesthetic of con-

atructiviasm.'?
The description suggests, the drawings confirm, that this is a Futurist
conception, subjected to the order of what Oud would have called an
‘unhistorical Classicism’, almost a square in plan, and almost a pure prism
in bulk, with rather diagrammatic structure of stanchions and girders, to
which all the mandatory ‘accessories’ including the lifts are tacked on as
independent elements, in the Guadetesque sense of an element as the
embodiment of a function, not in the Elementarist sense of an element as
an atomic unit of structure or space-division, In Wesnin and in Lissitsky,
as much as in Qud or in Le Corbusier, one can see that reabsorption of new
concepts into traditional disciplines that made the creation of architecture
possible, even at the cost of theoretical contradictions.

But before this could be done, the new ideas had to be made familiar and
universal, and perhaps the most important outcome of 1922, and its
encounters between van Doesburg and Lissitsky, was, for this reason, the
Disseldorf Congress of Progressive Artists. Though this was, to judge
from the accounts given of it, little more than a fraternal assemblage of
kindred spirits and a certain amount of more or less orderly discussion, its
consequences for the arts of design were far greater than were those of the
more widely publicised congresses of 1921 (Paris and Weimar, both
Dadaist dominated). Chiefly this was due to its genuinely international
character, for it brought together not oniy de Styl and the G group, its
effective instigators, but also the Futurists from Italy, L’Effort Moderne
from Paris, the M44 group of Hungarian expatriates, Victor Bourgeois’s
Sept Arts connection from Brussels, various Dadaists and other indepen-
dents. It thus covered progressive Abstractionists from France, Belgium,
Holland, Switzerland, Germany, and Russia, and also opened up lines of
communication with Austria, Hungary and Eastern Europe. It created an
international awareness of a continent-wide Abstractionist-Architectural
Movement, it made that Movement aware of itself, and thus made its
members and groups aware of one another, so that questions of primacy
and influence become almost insoluble from 1922 onwards—to judge from
de Stijl and L’Effort Moderne, for instance, any new thing would. get in
one Magazine as scan ag it got into the other, and ideas became common
property as quickly as they were printed and the magazines posted.

The new state of affairs was formally recognised, so to speak, by the
formation of a Constructivist International to whose Foundation Manifesto

44 From Lissitsky’s book Russiand (Vienna, 1930, p. 13).

reference has already been made, and whose signatories were van Doesburg
and Lissitsky themselves, Hans Richter and Max Burchardt (Germany)
and Karel Maes (Belgium). As an operative body, this international was
only a gesture, and soon evaporated—partly because it was not really
needed when communications were good enough to keep the various
Abstractionists in touch, and partly because its moving spirits left Germany
and lost personal touch with one another in 1923. Lissitsky, shortly fol-
lowed by his pretésé Mart Stam, transferred to Zurich {on account of his
health—he was consumptive}, where he soon founded a new review ABC
closely modelled on the short-lived G; and van Doesburg, with his wife and
new-found disciple Cor van Eesteren, moved to Paris at the invitation, it is
said, of Léonce Rosenberg. His subsequent activities become more and
mnore involved with Paris and its art-world, though he and van Eesteren
achieved a major coup when van Eesteren won the competition for the
replanning of Unter den Linden with a scheme that is an ingenious recom-
bination of ideas from van Eesteren’s Acadernic training, de St#/ sculpture,
and some of the projects executed in Ladowski’s ‘psychotechnical labora-
tory’ in Moscow, but later published in ABC.

About the same time, there was a further wave of recruiting for de Styl
which included such unconformable personalities as Antheil the composer,
and the sculptor Constantin Brancusi—the latter having been taken on,
seemingly, to replace Mondriaan, who resigned in 1925, as honorary
figure-head to the movement. However, before these events took place,
van Doesburg, van Eesteren and Rietveld issued a new Manifesto, Vers
une Construction Collective" which reveals, in the very first word of its
title, the immediate impact of Paris. It is a curious document, with its
eclecticism, its pretensions {and they are no more} to scientific objectivity,
but it is important because it brings together a number of ideas that were
to remain current, in association, for some time

1, Working collectively we have examined architecture as an unity created by

all the arts, industry, technology, etc. and find that the consequences give a
hew style

z. We have examined the Laws of Space and their infinite variations (that is,

the contrast of spaces, their dissonances, their complements, ete.) and we
find that these variations can be regulated to a balanced unity

3. We have examined the Laws of Colour in apace and continuity, and find that

a balanced relationship of these elements will finally give a new and positive
uyuty

4. We have examined the relationships of Space and Time, and find that the

manifestation of these two elements through colour gives a new dimension

s. We have exammed the reciprocal relationships of measure, proportion, space,

time and materials and have found the definitive method for building them
inte unity .

6. We have, by the destruction of enclasure—wallsa, etc.—removed the duality

of interior and exterior

18 This appeared in de Stii, VI, columns 91, 92, under the title *-()+ =K,',
and ir; November of the same year (1924) in L’Effort Moderne under its regular
dtle of Vers une Construction Collective.

3. We have established the true place of colour in architecture, and we declare
that painting without architectural construction {that ts, the easel-painting)
has no further reason for existence

a. The era of destruction is completely finished, a new era begins, of Comstruc-
hen

The incantatory effect of the repetitions and partial repetitions of the
middie passages of this document cannet conceal the fact that the lack of
anything new to say has been made good by saying things that other people
have said before, even as far back as Georges Seurat, whose laws of colour-
harmony have been barely rewritten to give these ‘Laws of Space’. Simi-
larly, there is nothing very new in the other main van Doesburg document
of this period, the ‘manifesto’ Tot cen Beeldende Archttectuur of 1924.
However, one or two of the numbered propositions are worth citing, for
the way in which they crystatlise certain ideas that were current in Elernen-
tarist circles, Thus there is the Lissitskian

4. The new architecture is functional; that is, it is developed out of an accurate

setting forth of practical demands, which it establishes in a comprehensible

pian
—but Lissitskian with the proviso that it may also owe a good deal to Paris,
both in the use of the word funetionee! (probably for the first time in that
sense in a Northern language) and in the emphasis on pian. In a later pro-
position there is also an attempt to formulate the aesthetic behind the
sprawling, space-invading plans, and balcony-broken elevations of Elemen-
tarist buildings, thus

11, The new architecture is anti-cubic; that is, it does not seek to fix the various

functional space-cells together within a clased cube, but throws the func-
tional space-cells ... away from the centre of the cube towards the outside,
whereby height, width, depth +time tend towards a wholly new plastic
expression in open space.

De Stijl as a generating influence was practically finished by 1924~5, yet
some of the most indicative works of art generated by that influence were
produced in those two years. Rietveld’s Schrader House, at Utrecht was,
and remains, the only Elementarist structure to be builtin permanent form.
It owes a good deal to Oud's factory projects of rg1g, and the play of spaces
and planes on the outside has very little relation to the interior, but the
bold display of horizontal and vertical slabs, steel stanchions and hand-rails,
the window-frames, eaves and other ‘proper elements’ on the outside do
form a sort of habitable Elementarist structure on the scale of man, At the
same time Kiesler, who joined de Stijl in 1923, when Lissitsky left, was
elaborating a completely open spatial aesthetic on a rectangular grid, which
was fully and properly seen by the world at large at the Paris exhibition of
rga5, when it occupied a large part of the Austrian Pavilion, under the
name of La Cité dans ?’ Espace. It was a suspended construction of wooden
rails and flat planes forming and occupying the rectanguiarities of a spatial
grid in the regular Elementarist way, but to judge from Kiesler’s notes of

the subject in de Stijl, VII, it had alsa some of the properties of Proun

A system of tension in free space

A change of space into urbanism

No foundation, ne walla

Detachment from the earth, suppression of the static axis

In creating new possibilities for living, it creates a new society

In creating this space-structure, he had reached the end of the possibilities
of an aesthetic, as Malevitsch had done in 1918 with his White on White, and
subsequent exhibition structures have achieved a similar extreme position
to Le Cité dans P Espace without ever being able to go any further. It
represents the ultimate condition of the ideas of de Stijl and Elementarism,
and the read of progress lay in side-stepping them, or replacing their
merely analytical approach by a synthetic one.

This process was put in hand by Mart Stam, who delivered the design of
chairs from the similar Elementarist inopasse into which Rietveld had led
it in 1919. Both Marcel Breuer and Le Corbusier produced chairs which
were, in terms of their overall conception, Rietveld’s chair reworked in
fabric and steel. Fabric replaced the planks of the seats and arms, steel tube
replaced the wooden rails of the supporting structure, and though side-
tubes were needed to keep the fabric in shape and in tension, the backs and
seat were clearly conceived as quite separate from the supporting parts, a3
they had been in the original Rietveld model. Both of these chairs were also
armchairs, and where Mart Stam set his foot on the road of development
was in undertaking the design of an upright chair. Here, the back and the
seat could be made co-planar with the horizontals and verticals of the sup-
porting structure, the separate side-tubes could be eliminated and. the
fabric could be stretched directly over opposite members of the structural
frame, which could, itself, be reduced to a single loop of tube, bending the
front legs under to form jong feet, extending to the back of the chair, and
thus eliminating the need for back legs.

This was how Stam concetved his chair Jate in rg24, but for lack of
technical resources the earliest models had to be made of lengths of straight
tube joined by elbow-pieces, thus losing the springiness inherent in the
design. However, in 1925, the preparations for the Weissenhof exhibition
brought him once more into contact with Mies van der Rohe, who had
access to the necessary pipe-bending technicians, and in 1926 the Stam
chair was realised, as was an alternative by Mies, which set out to exploit
the spring possibilities of this design to the full by treating the whole of the
front legs as a continuous curved spring (though this made it difficult
to get in and out of). The design won immediate acceptance and the pro-
liferation of such integrated designs for steel tube chairs was so rapid and
universal that it soon appeared almost an anonymous, automatic creation
of the Zeitgeist like Choisy’s flying buttress. But one should observe that
there existed parties with a definite interest in epreading this idea, and there


is a patent disingenuousness in the attempt of del Marle (an ex-Futurist
in close touch with de Szjl) to excuse his own obvious cribbing of the Mies
chair, by saying in L’Effort Moderne in 1927

For practically a year we laboured, my faithful craftaman and [, upon ite

possibilitiea,

Parallel to us, Mies van der Rohe, Marcel Breuer, Mart Stam,

Steel, so modern a material, and the Rationalism that cotmumands ita use, to-

gether give al] our realisations a family face. Should the credit go to Mies van

der Rohe or to Brever? Plagiatisin? NEVER. Rationalism engenders a collective art.
This is altogether too knowing, and a little too quick off the mark in
scouting the idea of plagiarism, but it has an interest besides its disin-
genuousness, It could only have appeared plausible at a time when it was
general practice to suppress or ignore the actions that generate history
(such as Stam’s invention of the integrated chair) and make history the
generator of the actions, and so far had this tendency gone by the time that
van Doesburg assembled the material for de Sujf's tenth anniversary
number in 1927, that even the things that its members and contributors
had undoubtedly done were being attributed to the activities of the Zett-
geist,4 and he made himself and the movement Jook ridiculous by over-
compensating, with wild claims to influence on Malevitsch, Le Corbusier,
Mallet Stevens and others.

The truth, almost inevitably, lies between the two, The spirit of the times
in the plastic arts was largely the creation of an mteraction of Cubist forms
and Futurist ideas, as was de Stifi, as were most of the movements it en-
countered or allied itself te. Much of de Stéil’s importance lay in its being
first in the field with an organised body of ideas, a magazine and an ener-
getic impresario. By this early leadership it was to be enabled to give an
international unity to a number of diverse groups, and, through Lissitsky,
bring the Russian contribution to the notice of Europe. Paradoxically, it
was Russia that offered the way of deliverance from the limitations of de
Sigl’s own aesthetics, as has been noted in connection with Mart Stam,
but as must also be recognised in connection with van Doesburg himself,
whose new style, which he developed in the middle Twenties, was not only
called by him Elementarist (though it differed from structural Elemen-
tarism) but also depended on a diagonal mode of composition that he clearly
derived from Ladowskian aesthetics by way of Lissitsky, and has a history
in the Russian Movement that goes back to paintings done by Malevitsch
during the War. Van Doesburg and Hans Arp used this mode of composi-
tion, as well as Arp'’s newly developed ‘biomerphic’ abstraction in the
decoration of the dubette café and cinema in Strassburg in 1927-8, but
Russianism on an even bigger scale can be seen in some Bauhaus projects
of the late Twenties, such as Brever’s scheme for a theatre at Kharkov or

4 Mondnaan was no help here; by 1926 he had begun to speak of de Suijl in

the past tense, and say that its existence or otherwise aa a group was unimportant,
sufficient was the fact that a new art now existed, etc.

Gropiua's design for a civic centre in Halle, which are very different to the
heat asymmetrical groupings of boxes they had done earlier under van
Doesburg’s and Moholy-Nagy’s influence, for their boldly exposed lattice
girders and other structures bear witness to the influence of architectural
Constructivism,


Section four

PARIS: THE WORLD OF ART AND LE CORBUSIER

Apollinaire, G: Les Peintres Cubistes, Paris, 1913.
Gleizes, A: Du Cubisme, Paris, 1920
Cocteau, J: Le Rappel d ?Ordre, Paris, 1923.
Ozenfant & Jeanneret: Aprés le Cubisme, Paria, 1919.
La Peiniure Moderne, Paris, 1926.
Gauthier, M: Le Corbusier, Paris, 1926.
Le Corbusier: Ocuwre Compléte, vol. I, Zurich, 1946.
Vers une Architecture, Paria, 1923.
Urbanisme, Paris, 1926.
(Note, the quotations from these last two works which
appear in the following pages are taken from Frederick
Etchell’s standard English translations—Towerds a New
Architecture, and The City of Tomorrow—wherever possible.)
Periodicals
L’Esprit Nouveau, 1919-1925.
L’Effort Moderne, 1924-1927-
L’ Architecture Vivante, 1923 onwards.
Journal de Psychologie Normale et Pathologique
{special issue, No. 23, 1926, on aesthetics and the arts with essays by
Ozenfant, Le Corbusier, Pierre Urbain).

15: Architecture and the Cubist tradition

SO POWERFUL Was the niystique of reinforced concrete in Paris by about
1920 that many French writers have accepted the idea that the new
architecture of the Twenties was in some way caused by this one material,
rather than facilitated by it. This acceptance of Choisy’s view of technique
a3 a prime cause of style, was doubtless encouraged by the dominating
position of Perret as the sole innovator of consequence in the years immedi-
ately before the War, but Rob Mallet-Stevens is speaking in the most
general terms when he declares, in 1925,)
Abruptly, everything changed. Reinforced concrete appeared revolutionising
the processes of construction .. . science creates a new aesthetic, fonms are
profoundly modified.
Indeed, he goes so far as to attribute the lag in architectural development
as between Europe and America (dates were not his strong point) to an
American preference for the wrong material, iron.
Reinfarced concrete supervened. The Americans resisted this mode of con-
struction for a long time, and iron reigned supreme in their art of building.
The position here adopted by Mallet-Stevens clearly accepts reinforced
concrete as something which had imposed itself, just as Choisy supposed
the flying buttress to have imposed itself, and this imposition he accepted
as a sufficient explanation of the new aesthetic, the profoundly modified
forms, However, at a distance of almost forty years in time, it is clear that
the modes of employing reinforced concrete were already extremely various,
ranging from the careful Classicism of Perret to the beld vault-work of
Freyssinet, and that none of these varieties was, in practice, employed by
the younger architects who made the French contribution to the mainstream
of the International Style. In particular, they avoided vaults, and curved
forms in section generally (which even Perret employed), but frequently
made use of curved forms in plan, Though they paid frequent Hp-service
to the achievements of their immediate elders, their only real inheritance
from these pioneers of reinforced concrete was Perret’s preference for

1 This, alao, is from Wendingen’s special number on Frank Lloyd Wrght!

EEE EE EE EE a
eee

trabeated structural frames. [t is clear that their choice of an architectural
idiom must have been affected by influences outside the Rationalist and
Academic traditions, and at least two of these influences are easy to identify,
One is the actual business of building in Paris, its finance, its patronage, its
vernacular traditions, which will be dealt with in the next chapter; the
other influence is that of the Cubist tradition in the visual arts,

This Cubist tradition was, itself, part of that larger and paradoxical
tradition of being anti-traditional, that goes back, in painting, at least to
Courbet, parallel with an innovating tradition in Rationalist architectural
thought that goes back to Labrouste. Both traditions were regarded, with
varying justification, as anti-Academic, but Cubism, more than any pre-
vious phase of the pictorial revolution, presented aspects that could be
approximated to those of Rationalist architectural theory. This could not
be done directly with either the works or the recorded utterances of the
founding masters, Picasso and Braque, in spite of their occasional use of
architectural subject-matter, but already (by 1912) in the work of Gris there
was sensibly the employment of structural prids and proportional systems.
However, it was from the ‘intellectual’ wing of Cubism, the Groupe dz
Puteaux, exhibiting as the Section d’Or, that the most productive line of
development was to stem.

This group centred around the Duchamp brothers: Marcel, Gaston (who
used the som-de-pinceau of Jacques Villon} and Raymond (who hyphenated
Villon on to his legal surname). There are some striking, though probably
accidental resemblances between tricks of draughtsmanship employed by
Sant’Elia, and some employed by Jacques Villon, and Raymond had
architectural leanings, while Fernand Leger, who was also a member of the
group, had drawing offices experience. However, the one surviving record
(a photograph of a model and some interiors} of the Cubist architecture of
Raymond Duchamp-Villon suggests that his ideas lay a long way from the
progressive trends of the time of its conception, 1942. It is little more than
the routine structure of a symmetrical villa in the Mansardic tradition®
tricked out with fans of prismatic mouldings instead of Rococo (or even
Art Nouveau) details. The fact that this no more than superficially Modern
design was deemed worthy of illustration in Apollinatre’s Les Peintres
Cubistes suggests that the Movement as a whole was thoroughly out of
touch with forward ideas in architecture—a point that is worth making in
view of what has been so often said or implied about the connections
between Cubism and the International Style.

As has been said elsewhere, it is only in conjunction with Futurist ideas
that Cubism was able to make any significant contribution to the main-
stream, but the particular conjunction achieved by Marcel Duchamp, the
member of the Groupe de Puteaux who is most important in this connection,

* A model of the facade waa reproduced in Guillaume Apollinaire’s Le: Peintres
Cubistes (Paris, 1913).

18 very different to that found in the circle of de Sti? or the Elementarists,
The peculiar slant given to Cubo-Futurist aesthetics by Duchamp is pre-
sent as early as a work that has been discussed already as a posstble source
of Futurist pictorial methods, the ‘Coffee MilP of rgi1r. Whereas in the
work of Picasso and Braque by 1911 the ‘decomposition’ of subject-matter
had been brought to an advanced stage in the interests of certain purely
pictorial and personal preoccupations (violent imagery, controlled space-
illusions, etc.}, Duchamp decomposes the ‘Coffee Mill’ in order to reveal
its mechanics, as in an exploded view in an instruction manual—there is
even an arrow showing which way te turn the crank, He has shifted atten-
tion from the business of picture-making to an examination of the innerste
Wesen of the picture's subject-matter, though his reasons for doing so are
less likely to be those of Werkbund Rationalists than those of Futurist
anti-Traditionalists.

In the next phase, both wings of Cubism work to eliminate the distine-
tion between picture and subject-matter, but in opposite directions.
Picasso and Braque, by applying pieces of the subject-matter directly to the
picture surface (collage) eventually arrive at a form of picture which is not
a representation, but a thing to be valued in its own right, or, in Ozenfant’s
words*

The emotion no longer comes from an extrinsic object reproduced or painted

on the canvas, but from within the picture: tebleau-objet.

But if Picasso and Braque had sacrificed their subject-matter for the sake
of the picture, Duchamp now did the other thing, and sacrificed the
picture for the sake of the subject-matter. The ‘Bicycle Wheel’, of 1912,
was exactly what it claimed to be, and being mounted in such a way that it
was free to turn, presented Futurist motion in actuality, not painted
illusion, The mest celebrated, and instructive of his ready-mades, however,
was the ‘Bottle-rack’ which he exhibited in New York in 1914. This was an
objet-objet, so to speak, of the purest type, without the side interests pre-
sented by the rotation of the “Bicycle Wheel’. The subject-matter becomes,
without any transformation or qualification, the object presented for the
public to view—the shocking effect it had was less concerned with iconc-
graphy (somewhat similar functional objects were familiar in Cubist still-
lifes) than with the climination of too many stages of the traditional
process: subject-artist-painting-public.

But the other aspect of this unconventional gesture is of greater histori-
cal importance, even if of less interest to Duchamp himself. His intention
may have been to deflate the status of ‘art’, in the Marinettian manner, but
the status he conferred on a simple, mass-produced object by having it
exhibited in an art gallery went far beyond anything the Futurists or the
Werkbund had achieved up to that time. This was the first time (or, at least,

* In the Fournal de Peychologie Normaie (Paris, 1926, p. 295).


the first occasion of consequence) that an ordinary engineering product
had, in physical fact, been translated to the realm of art. It seers that for
Duchamp himself the gesture was self-sufficient, and self-justifying, but for
lesser men it was necessary to produce justificatory arguments, One such
was readily available in the New York circle with which Duchamp was
connected—Plato’s proposition in the PAtlebus that absolute beauty resides
in geometrical and manufactured objects

... Understand me to mean straight lines and circles, and the plane or solid

figures which are formed out of them by lathes, rulers and protractors; for these

I affirm to be ... eternal and absolutely beautiful,

G. H. Hamilton has noted* three uses of this quotation in the circle around
Alfred Stieglitz, to which Duchamp belonged: applied te Picasso in 1913;
to Cubism, Futurism and pure Abstraction in 1913; and again in 1913 by
Duchamp’s old associate from Puteaux, Francis Picabia, in discussing his
own paintings, which were almost Abstract at that time, but, under
Duchamp’s influence, soon also turned to Mechanistic satire on ‘art’,

Although the intention of both these artists remained satirical in an
elevated way, it would, clearly, be possible to rephrase this interconnection
of Abstract art, machine design, and absolute beauty in an equally elevated,
but more serious way. This they were unlikely to da in New York at that
time, but other members of their connection in Paris were to achieve this
standpoint at a later date, as soon as they disposed of a theory of Norms of
Types, like that current in Germany and Holland. At this point, it is worth
noting just how much Parisian theorists had in common with their Dutch
counterparts, since it is upon these common holdings that much of the
ultimate unity of the International Style was to depend. ‘They had a com-
mon Cubo-Futurist background, though differently interpreted; they had
a commen tendency to vaguely Platonic ideas {though the Philebus
quotation does not appear in de Stijl at all), and they shared Gino Severini,
whose analogies between art and machinery appeared in the Mercure de
France in the same year (1917) as they appeared in de Stgl. Actual sumilari-
ties of opmion will be noted in due course, the immediate interest of
Severini in this Parisian context Hes in another direction,

He was the first to call for a return to order—a return in the literal sense
of a turning back, from Cubism to Classicism,* to central perspective and
normally-constituted objects. The result, in Severini’s paintings of the
Twenties, is mere decorative prettiness, but he helped to bridge the gap
between painting and architecture, in which the Classical strain and the
appeal to the past were equally current in the early post-War years. In this
Classicising connection, however, the writing of another member of the
Groupe de Puteaux, Albert Gleizes, 1s of greater consequence. For him, as

4In an article on John Covert in College Art Fournal (New York, Fall 1952).
° He published a book entitled du Cudisme au Classicisme in Paris in 1921.

for some of the younger architects, the recovery of Classical discipline was
a step to something beyond Classicism.
When the ultimate effort has been made, it will not be Classicism they redis-
cover, but the tradition, pure and simple; that which used to permit a atrict and
hierarchical collaboration in the creation of works of impersonal art.
Here two concordances with Dutch ideas immediately strike the eye. One,
concerned with Gesamthunstwerk, is fully confirmed by Gleizes elsewhere;
the implications of collaboration and hierarchisée are supported by

La peinture et la sculpture sont fonction de l'architecture,

an idea which was common property but, in the case of Gleizes, could be
derived from Charles Blanc*

Leaving their common cradle in architecture, two arts have freed themselves
in succession from the maternal womb; sculpture frst, painting later.
The other Dutch concordance lies in the concept of an Quere d'art imper-
soneile, on which his ideas are almost Mondriaanesque.
Cubist paintings are impersonal . . . beauty is no longer seizable chance, but

unavoidabte.

While works of painting have hitherto been so fugittve that they could not be

duplicated ... these, now, can be multiplied to infinity, whether by the artist

who created them, or by scrupulous intermediaries... with paintings so that

no copy is more ‘original’ than another, the selling price will drop of its own

accor
The implication, that only works whose qualities are completely deter-
minate can be accurately reproduced, suggests (and the text elsewhere
confirms) that Gleizes is thinking of reproduction by hand, since most
mechanical means would have to be such (e.g. photographic) that they
could reproduce accidental effects as well. However, he speaks also of
autres moyens d'ordre mécanique, and thus implies that the benefits of mass-
production, or mass-reproduction, will only be conferred on the buying
public by objects which he elsewhere describes as conceived

..» following well defined, but nevertheless very simple laws

This idea, that only geometrically simple designs are cheap to mass-
produce, was common property by the end of the Twenties, and has
remained current ever since, But it was not Gleizes whe gave it currency,
and its wide distribution is due to those who combined it with a theory of
types and with the idea of the objet-objet, the Purists.

Though a number of artists in Paris around 1922 exhibited broadly
Purist tendencies, the Purists proper were only two, Amedée Ozenfant and
Charles Edouard Jeanneret. They first met in 1918, through the agency
of Auguste Perret, to whom Jeanneret, later to be known as Le Corbusier,
had been a draughtsman in 1908-9. Later, in 1910-11, he had been in
Germany to study the Werkbund and German design at the suggestion of

* Grammaire des Arts de Dessin (Paris, 1967, p. 509),


=_e ae

hia master at the art school of his native Chaux-de-Fonds. This trip brought
him in contact with the ideas of Muthesius and thus with the theory of
types. In 1913 he heard Berlage lecture on Wright, which seems to have
started an interest in the aesthetics of machine products, an interest which
ripened into an admiration for the simple geometrical forms of early air-
craft and automobile design during the years following his establishment
in Paris in 1917, in connection with the Voisin company. Thus, by the
time he met Ozenfant, when they were both aged thirty-three, he had
behind him a career rich, already, in experience of practically everything
except painting as a pure art, while Ozenfant who seems hardly to have
stirred outside the world of art, was better versed in the recent history of
Cubism than anything else. The difference of background is startlingly
manifest in the paintings they exhibited at their first Purist exhibition,
in 191g. Jeanneret’s have the studious simplicity of schoolroom exercises
in rendering regular geometrical solids, which is all that they are, whereas
Ozenfant’s have the strained quality of a sophisticated and romantic
talent, which indeed he possessed, being disciplined into simplicity for the
sake of an intellectual programme.

Given this peculiar combination of talents, well-informed on both the
recent developments in painting and on recent developments in technology,
it is not surprising that the Manifesto Apres le Cubisrte, which appeared as
the catalogue to this first exhibition, should read like a continuation of the
Classicised Cubo-Futurism of Severini and Gleizes—indeed such a pro-
gramme is consciously explicit in the magazine Sic which appeared in r9ré,
and with which, as with another short-lived periodical L’Eian, Ozenfant
had been connected. If Aprés Je Cubisme is tamer in its layout than either
of these magazines, it is also far more stimulating reading than the writing
of either Severini or Gleizes. The main drift of the argument depends on
the unity, later doubted by both authors, of art and science.

Nothing justifies us in supposing that there should be any incompatibility be-

tween science and art, ‘The one and the other have the common aim of reducing

the universe to equations. We shail prove that pure art and pure science are

not watertight domains. They have a common mind... art and science depend
on number,

From this they derive the proposition
The aim of pure science is the expression of natural laws through the search
for constants. The aim of serious art is also the expression of invariants.
The negative aspects of the zavariant bring the Purists fairly close to de
Sajl theory once more, for among the propositions which appear at the
end of Aprés le Cubisme (like the affirmations at the end of a Futurist
Manifesto) is one which reads
The work of art must not be accidental, exceptional, impressionist, inorganic,

protestatory, picturesque, but, on the contrary, generalised, static, expreasive of
the invariant.

But the positive aspects of this concept of Pinvariant tend in a quite different
direction as might be expected, because not only does it subsume the doer
axiales de Peeuvre d'art, but it could be extended to cover also the objet-
objet, which becomes platonised by the Purists as the objet-type, or objet-
standard, By this is implied an absolute object—house, bottle, guitar, ete.—
beyond the reach of the accidents of personality, perspective or time, and
also rnass-produced, Here, the Purists diverge also from the position
adopted by Duchamp five years earlier: his ‘Bottle-rack’ was mass-pro-
duced because no other kind of bottle-racks existed, and its metaphysical
overtones were almost accidental

The ready-mades may be unique as a concept, but they are not necessarily
unique as examples, For instance, the original ‘Bottle-rack’ was Jost and te-
placed by another.’

This represents a very drastic revision of the status of the work of art,
but it follows after the original gesture of exhibition. With the Purists,
however, even though the issue was prejudged, the choice of a certain class
of objects as the subject-matter of their painting was preceded, not followed,
by a variety of metaphysical, aesthetic and other arguments—arguments
which originally appeared in L'Esprit Nouveau (and were later reprinted
in La Peinture Moderne\. LE’ Esprit Nouveau was the last but one and by
far the most substantial of a series of attempts to found a Cubist magazine
in Paris, and its success was largely due to the fact that it transcended the
merely parochial interests of the School of Paris and became a magazine of
general progressive culture, Besides the two Purists whose interests were
already very wide, it had, in its early stages, a third founding director, Paul
Dermée, the poet. Even without his participation, however, the magazine
continued to embrace fields as diverse as architecture, painting, sculpture,
product design, music, literature, philosophy, psychology, politics and
economics. It enjoyed the support (unreliably) of certain commercial
interests* (Voisin, Pleyel, etc.} and by running for nearly six years, from
late rg19 to the middle of 1925, it proved itself more durable than any
other Modern-Movement periodicals except Der Sturm and de Stijl, while
in terms of sheer wordage and illustrations reproduced, it beats even these.

Even the name of the magazine had connections that promised the widest
scope. As has already been noted, the phrase esprit nouveau had been
employed by Choisy in a context that was likely to recommend it to others
demanding a rappel a@ Pordre, in architecture. But the phrase rappel a
Pordre is notoriously a Cocteauism, and in 1g1g Jean Cocteau was also
in possession of esprit nouveau, in the sense of a Zetigetst:

* According to H. and S$. Janis, in Robert Motherwell's book, The Dada Painters
and Poets (New York, 1951, p. JIE}

* Firms who rendered the magazine thia sort of aid received not only large areas
of advertising space aa such, but frequently received free puffs in the editorial
matter,


Liesprit nouveau agite toutes les branches de !’art."

The Punats were in fairly close touch with Cocteau during the early
Twenties (he contributed an article on the Groupe de Puteaux painter,
Roger de la Fresnaye, to the magazine) but the traditional derivation of the
name is via Dermée from Guillaume Apollinaire, who was using the phrase
esprit nouveau, to describe a kind of Futurist imperative to progress, in
the months preceding his death in 1920. At all events, it was a slogan that
gratified the senstbilities of several aspects of the Parisian avant-garde, and
carried implications that ranged from the Futurist to the Classicist, as did
the contents of the magazine itself, which, however, resisted any forward-
locking movements that seemed to spell disorder—its immediate response
to Freudian psychology, for instance, was derisive,

The arguments which lead up te the concept of the odjet-tvpe, or objef-
standard, represent a fairly thorough-going fusion of the Futurist, Cubist
and Classicising themes, and they start with a hostile assessment (as in
Aprés le Cubisme) of the state of Cubism in 1919. They declare the bank-
ruptcy of

Cubism Limited, proprietors of a patent process

though they declare their admiration for its earlier products, The bank-
ruptcy they attribute to the Cubists’ insistence on their droits au lyrisme,
which had caused their work to become too disorderly and too personal to
be in accord with the spirit of the times, which demanded order and unper-
sonality. The precise nature of their version of the spirit of the times is
established by means of a very revealing reworking of existing techniques
used by the Futurists. Thus, the illustrations to the chapter headed
‘Formation de l’Optique Moderne’, begin with a purely Futurist set of
images—a car, New York by night, the skeleton of an airship hangar, the
equipment of a dentist's surgery—but then follow two final mmages that
were, indeed, foreshadowed by Marinetti’s Manifesto of Geometrical and
Mechanical Splendour, but belong much more to the Purists’ insistence on
number, classification and order—a calculating machine and a filing system.
The important characteristics of the new times, as they saw them were
first: Economy

The gait of present civilisation, its future, its character, depend on awaited

discoveries, new forrnulas that provoke ever more economical mechanisms,

permitting us to use energy in more efficient ways, thus giving our potentialities,
and consequently our minds, a superior liberty and higher ambitions

second: The separation of techniques and aesthetics
Mechanisation has diverted from our hands all work of exactitude and quality,
and has delegated it ta the machine. Our situation appears more cleariy thereby:

on one side, technical knowledge remains with technology (mechanisation)
while, on the other, the plastic question remaing untouched. ... Mechanisation,

* Although Le Rappel 4 I'Ordre did not come out in book form until 1923, this
parbcular observation appeared in print in 1919.

having resolved the problems of technology, leaves the problem of art intact.
To refuse to recognise the step that has been taken is to impede the progreas of
art toward its pure and proper ends.

third: The dominance of simple geometry

If we go indoors to work . . , the office is square, the desk is square and cubic,
and everything on it ts at right angles {the paper, the envelopes, the correspon.
dence baskets with their geornetrical weave, the files, the fatders, the registera.
etc.}... the hours of our day are spent amid a geometrical spectacle, our eyes
ore subject to a constant commerce with forms that are almost all geometry
Art was to be yudged by the degree in which it was compatible with these
characteristics of the times, and most art was found to be so incompatible that
one is baffled by an inexplicable spectacle; practically everything proceeds by
anti-zeometry .. . so that one deduces that these are the works of some improb-
able race living cutside time, in countries where other laws seem to reign than
those that we have recognised, and are suited to our Eaculties of perception™
However, the reasons why geometry is the touchstone of probity are
double: not only is it the thumb-print of modern technology, but it is also
the manifestation of perennial laws governing art, justified by the past not
the present

It is in the past that the axial laws of the work of art are found, time alone prov-
ing their durability, their sine qua non,
and on the same page, the name of Phidias is cited, not for the first or last
time, a8 an ultimate term of reference in aesthetic value.

This double status of geometry, as something beth new and perennial, is
comparable to the status of abstraction in de Styl theary, and one might
be tempted to regard the two terms as almost interchangeable, particularly
since their associated ideas come so close. Thus

The vertical and the horizontal are—among the sensorial manifestations of

natural phenomena—verifications of one of the most directly apparent laws.

The horizental and the vertical determine two right angles, out of the infinity

of possible angles, the nght angle is the angle-type; the right angie is one of the

symbols of perfection
contains nothing to which Mondriaan could not have subscribed, and else-
where in La Peinture Moderne one can find Impressionism denounced,
nature suspected, handicraft despised, universality and internationalism
approved, The Purists’ quarrel with de Stl, which was fundamental though
not reciprocated, concerned the question of representation. Purist composi-
tions were built up, not of abstract forms, but of representations of objects.

™ Fernand Leger carried this comparison between art and machinery even far-
ther in L’Effort Moderne for February 1924, contrasting the formal disorder and
nusnced colours of the Salon d’Automne, with the precise and simple geometry,
the unmodulated ‘local’ colours of the exhibits in the Salon d' Aviation, with which
it shared the Grand Palais in 1921. He also commented pityingly on the pathetic
awe with which the technicians, having slipped through the partition, viewed the
works of art—but failed to observe that he must have presented an analogous
spectacle to them.

These can no longer be the abstract or conventional symbols cf writing or
mathematics, which escape those who do not know the code, but facts con-
ditioned in such a manner as to stir ur senses effectively, and also to interest
our minds,
Thua, for example, a negative demonstration is furnished today by a whole
movement in painting recently born in Holland, which appears to us to have
withdrawn completely from the necessary and sufficient conditions for painting
(intelligibility and perceptual apparatus} using only certain geometrical signs
bounded by the rectangle.
One might, by an art stripped bare, strive for purity of expression; yet the means
chosen must permit one to say something, and that worth saying.
As to what was worth being sard, the Purists were prepared to admit of any
theme that might be proposed, but for themselves, true heirs of Puteaux,
they accepted a restriction to a limited range of objet-types. "This acceptance
was as explicit in their writings as in their paintings, and is formulated, in
La Peinture Moderne, at the end of a remarkable eulogy of mass-produced
utensils. Purism, the authors state, desires to go beyond the purely orna-
mental pleasures of abstract art, in order to offer une emotion intellectuelle et
affective
‘That is why Purism begins with elements chosen from existing objects, extract-~
ing their most specific forma,
It draws them for preference from arnong those that serve the most direct of
human uses; these which are like extensions of man’s limbs, and thus of an
extreme intimacy, @ banality that makes them barely exist ag subjects of interest
in themselves, and hardly lend themselves to anecdote.

But these objects which figurent le mieux l’objet-type, were endowed with
an almost moral importance as products of extreme economy.
Purism has brought te light the Law of Mechantcal Selection. ‘This establishes
that objects tend toward a type that is determined by the evolution of forms
between the ideal of maximum utility, and the satisfaction of the necessities of
economical manufacture, which conform inevitably to the laws of nature. This
double play of iaws has resulted in the creation of a certain number of objects
that may thus be called standardised. . . . Without prescribing any theme,
Purism has 460 far limited its choice to these objects
As they appear in Purist paintings—an appearance which is of importance
for the effect it had upon the formal usages of the architecture produced
by Jeanneret in his “Le Corbusier’ persona—these simple objects, mostly
bottles, carafes, glasses and smoker's equipment, are presented, not in
central perspective, but in 2 side-elevation convention closely based on
that of engineering drawing, but with a form of pseudo-plan shown for the
tops of open vessels (more rarely for their bases) which are presented as
quartics, or circles, The avoidance of perspective was programmatic, firstly
to eliminate accidents

Ordinary perspective in its full theor:tical rigour, givea only the accidental
appearance of objects"?

8 [hia is quoted from one of the essays in ZL’ Esprit Nowveau that was somewhat
modified when transferred to .¢ Peinture Aloderne, and the phrase does not exist,
as such, in the book, though it clearly belunga to ity argument.

and secondiy, because such an elimination of the accidents of perspective
was held to be particularly necessary in the representation of types. This
idea can be traced back, before the War, to Maurice Princet, an actuary
who was friendly with Braque and Picasso, and is reported to have asked

You represent by means of a trapezium a table as you see it, distorted by per-

spective, but what would happen if you took it into your head ta represent a

teble-type. You would have to set it up in the picture-plane and revert from a

trapezium to a true rectangle, Hf this table was covered in objects equaily dis-

torted by perspective, the same movement of correction would operate for each

of them. Thus, che oval of 2 glass would become an exact circle... .1#

As they appear in aesthetic theory—an appearance that affected both Le
Corbusier's architecture and his views on furnishing—these simple
objects can be related to the ideas of at least one other influential thinker,
Paul Valéry, also a Classicist fascinated by mathematics. It will be noted that
the Purists say that the double play of laws (function and economy) das
resulted, in the perfect tense, in the creation of a certain number of stan-
dardised objects. That is to say, their odjets-type stand at the end of a
completed process (a remarkable attitude for two authors who had gone
eut of their way to indicate that the whole basis of life was undergoing a
technical revolution) and a similar view of a terminated process is found in
Valéry’s almost contemporary Eupalinos, ou larchitecte

Phaedrus: ‘There are some admirable tools, neat as bones.

Socrates: They are self-made, to some extent: centuries of use have necessarily
discovered the best form, uncountable practice achieves the ideal,
and there stops, The best efforts of thousands of men converge
slowly towards the most economical and certain shape.”

However, there is evidence that the Purists did not believe, in practice,
that the process was finished. In discussing the mazson-outil, or matson-type
in his architectural writings of the same period, Le Corbusier emphasises
that its form is not, as yet, functienal, economic or settled. In their paint-
ings too, the Purists practised selection over and above that exercised by
industry and commerce, refusing to admit to their range of subject-matter
certain objects (such as imitation cut-glass tumblers) that persisted in the
catalogue illustrations that were their sources, in defiance of the pseudo-
Darwinian Law of Mechanical Selection—they were quite preyared, in
fact, to finish a process that would not finish itself.

What is interesting in this situation is that, as has been seen, most of the
ideas deployed by the Purists can be traced back to 1913 and beyond—the
object, the type, the platonic, mechanistic and geometric preferences had
all been current before the War, but no one then, had been able to weld

14 This question has achieved a slightly legendary status in the history of Cubism,
but was not committed to print until it was quoted by André L’hote, as late as
1933, in L’Amour de Art (Paris, 1933, No. g, p. 216}.

4 Tn the definitive texts of Eupalinos (e.g. Professor Stewart's translation) this
exchange does not appear, and it is quoted here from the headpiece to Pierre
Urbain’s essay in the Journal de Psychologie Normaie,

them inte a coherent aesthetic philosophy which, as in Le Corbusier's
hands, could embrace buildings, the objects that furnished and equipped
them, and the works of art that embellished them. Partly this must have
been due to the excessively tumultuous condition of Cubist circles before
1g14. but even more it was probably due to the emergence of a sudden
early maturity in many branches of machine design immediately after 1918.
The Purists’ vision of a mechanical and geometrical environment was there
for all to see, with even greater force than the earlier vision of the Futurists.
Much of the elementary platonic geometry exhibited by the machinery of
the Twenties was far from inherent in the nature of mechanical design, but
the preduct of personal and local aesthetic choice, and therefore transient
—technology was not on the verge of achieving formes definitives, as
Pierre Urbain believed, but was shortly te get on the move again. But the
temporary halt and stabilisation of design persisted long enough to convince
thase who were ready to be convinced that the perennial laws of geometry
were about to drive accident and variability from the visual world, that the
equipment of daily life was about to achieve final and typical form,

Among those who were convinced was Jeanneret-Corbusier, who gave
so much weight to the importance of the stabilised, finalised, mass-pro-
duced objet-type, that his last werd on architecture in 1923, the last illus-
tration in Vers une Architecture, was a plain English briar-pipe, offered
without explanation or justification, but with the clear implication that this
was the standard to which architecture sheuld aspire. However, the evolu-
tion of his ideas on the maison-type was conditioned, warped and finally
frustrated by the market in which he hoped to build it, the building world
of Paris whose characteristics in the Twenties were so exceptional that they
must be described before we turn to the matson-type itself.

16: Progressive building in Paris: 19718-15923

THE SITUATION FACING Le Corbusier, or anyone else hoping to erect
Moder buildings in Paris in the Nineteen-twenties, was stimulating,
frustrating, and complicated.! Intellectually architects might find them-
selves aspiring to build on a grand scale for a new mechanised society, but
economically and socially they would often find themselves driven to erect
small buildings of specialised type for a class of patrons they suspected as
representatives of a dead social order. Hence their hatred of the established
architectural order, of the Ecole and the Académie—hence too their private
feuds and passionate attachments to this master or that. The combination
of intellectual abundance and physical restriction is one of the most striking
features of this situation.

Intellectually, the climate of ideas could hardly have been richer, and
remained so till the end of the decade. Extremist movements may have
been short-lived, but they were replaceable. Futurism remained an active
force until about the middle of the decade, the survivors of the heroic age
of Cubism were still present. The freedoms of Dadaism may have proven
unsubstantial, but they were succeeded after 1922 by the more organised
prograrnme of liberation of the Surrealists. Purism may have expired in
1925, but van Doesburg was at hand to provoke a ferment of Abstractionist
activity toward the end of the decade, L'Esprit Neuveau may have expired
with its parent movement, but L’Effert Moderne,? last of the Cubist
magazines, had already been appearing for almost two years, and there
was also, by 1925, a magazine devoted specifically to progressive archi-
tecture, L’ Architecture Vivante,? edited by Albert Morancé and Jean
Badovict.

These two last-named publications are important for their internation-
alism, giving considerable space to Dutch, German and Russian design,

! Outside Le Corbusier's Euere Compléie, and similar publications about André
Lurgat and Michel Roux-Spitz, the documentation of the buildings of Paris in thia
period is thin, and the coverage by periodicals almost non-existent. This chapter is
therefore very deeply indebted to the personal reminiscences of Emé Goldfirger,

Pierre Vago and André Lurrat, ;
* Began to appear in 1924. * Began to appear in 1923.


a

and reprinting articles by van de Velde, Oud, Mondriaan, van Doesburg,
Loos and others. Furthermore, the range of personalities that a young
architect could adopt as a master was widening. Perret and Garnier were
both established in Paris by now, as was Adolf Leos, and there were soon
new buildings by all three of them to admire—Perret’s church at Raincy,
Garnier’s town hall at Boulogne-sur-Seine, and Loos’s house for Tristan
Tzara in the Avenue Junot. Only Perret was officially (or unofficially}
available as a teacher, and even Loos recommended his disciples to study
under hiro in preference to any of the younger Moderns or himself.

You come to Paris to learn French, not Esperanto.

However, although Perret’s school in the Palais de Bois was a formally
constituted atelier of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, official discrimination
against his students was such that they had to finish their course under
some other master if they hoped to be Diploméd. This is typical of the official
attitude to even. middle-of-the-road progressive design, but the paucity of
official or municipal commissions for younger architects has another reason
beyond this. In contrast to the situation in Germany, where progressive
architects, at least after 1925, could almast count on employment from
progressive official bodies in such work as the design of large housing
schemes, work of this scale and nature was unusual in France in the
Twenties. Apart from the ‘new town’ at Villeurbane, and a privately
sponsored settlement at Pessac, designed by Le Corbusier, there is little
that can be compared with German activity. Michel Roux-5Spitz was the
nearest to a young Modernist to receive any official work, and that at the
very end of the decade, while Henri Sauvage's block of flats in the Rue des
Amiraux is as unusual in being a large, modern apartment house as it is
in being patently derived from Sant'Elia’s case a gradinate.

But the range and source of foreign influence in Paris went far beyond
the presence of Loos, The city, as the artistic capital of the world, was fuil
of students and artists from overseas, and many of its key figures had
foreign backgrounds, To speak only of architects, Le Corbusier’s outside
connections have already been mentioned, but he had also travelled as far
afield as Turkey, while Robert Mallet-Stevens was of Belgian extraction, had
a long-standing connection with England, and a professed admiration for
Mackintosh. Yet the biggest single source of outside influence on younger
Paris architects at this time was undoubtedly the Exposition des Arts
Décoratifs in 1925. This has its place in the history of Western taste, in
any case, as the source of the popular jazz-modern style that was for some
time a rival to the International style, but Mailet-Stevens and the Purists
were also involved in it, the former in the design of an entrance and some
Cubistic concrete ‘trees’, the latter, after much backstage intrigue, in the
erection of the Pavilion de P Esprit Nouveau, which will be discussed in a
later chapter.

From abroad there came a Dutch Pavilion in an overwrought but not
untypical Amsterdam idiom, designed by J. F. Staal, a British Pavilion
that could have been designed by a Frenchman (in fact, by Easton and
Robertson), while an Austrian Pavilion designed by Josef Hoffmann, but
containing Keisler’s Cité dans Espace, which has already been described,
brought Elementarist design to Paris for the the first time on a large enough
scale to be appreciated as architecture, and had a visible influence on the
garden elevation of Le Corbusier’s Villa at Garches, designed in the fol-
lowing year. But the pavilion which seems to have made the biggest impact
was that from the USSR. At sucha time it could hardly have gone unnoticed
however it had been designed, but Melnikow’s deceptively simple structure
in wood must have looked as if it had been deliberately conceived to excite
and annoy. Its general form was a glass-walled parallelogram, with a broad
precessional staircase, partly open to the sky under the truss-work of the
roof. This staircase, which brought the visitor up to first-floor level and
then down again, traversed the plan on its longer diagonal, thus giving the
pavilion a form of symmetry, but not one that was listed among the
Academic recipes—thus provoking the Beaux-Arts aesthetician Borislav-
lievitch to a violent attack, occupying three pages of the journal La Con-
struction Moderne, Younger and less prejudiced visitors, however, would
probably agree with Lissitsky’s estimate of it*

... the project aims at the loosening up of volumes through the free disposition
of the staircase. ... The building is honestly built of wood, not on the Nationa-
list iog-cabin principle, bat in a Modern carpentry technique. It is transparent,
the colours are pure. No false monumentaliry but a new sensibility.

Allin all, this was a promising environment for younger architects to de-
velop a new architecture—except in the matter of patronage. This came,
when it did come, from a small, if cosmopolitan, section of Paris society
which was already sufficiently sophisticated visually to accept architectural
forms that, however Functional and Rational, were as unconventional as
those of Cubist and Futurist art. In other words, the clientele of Modern
architecture was composed of artists, their patrons and dealers, and a few
casual visitors to the architectural section of the Salon @’Automne, ‘The
consequence was, firstly, that they would nearly all require at least one large,
well-windowed nerth-light room, te use as a studio or gallery, secondly that
their private lives were apt to be so eccentric as to put anti-typical demands
on functional planning, and thirdly that, although a few were as munificent
as the Princesse de Polignac, most of them were of only moderate means
and needed very economical structures. In addition, buildings of this kind,
for a patronage that was often foreign m extraction, seemed often to attract
randomly spiteful application of the town-planning by-laws by the Pré-
fecture de la Seine.

* Russland, p. 14.

aa 2

The general consequence was that the bulk of Modern architecture in
Paris in the Twenties consisted of one particular marson-type, the stadio-
house, twisted out of recognition by randem or personal factors. Thus the
pure studio-type appears far more frequently in Le Corbusier’s projects
than in his built work, and André Lurcat, the most prolific builder of
studios, only on one occasion approximates really closely to the type, in a
house in Boulogne-sur-Seine, late in the decade. Yet, if the type was
obscured, it was never absent from architects’ thoughts for long, and often
coloured their designs for buildings with quite different functions. The
existence of the type dates back to the previous century, when it could often
be found in its pure form of a long, narrow house, its dimensions fixed by
the normal dimensions of a Paris building plot. Since it was usually hard
up against other buildings on either side, its windows were all on the ends,
those on the more northerly end usually being amalgamated into one single
expanse of glass, often two stories high and spreading from wall to wall to
light the studio.

The two-storey studio can also be taken aa a given feature, often with
a storage or sleeping balcony across the back of it, reached by a spiral stair
or cat ladder, especially where studios were stacked up in multi-storey
blocks, as they are at the foot of Montmartre. In these cases any other
necessary rooms were usually at the back of the studio, but in single-
studio houses they were more often underneath. The difficulty of spanning
the width of the studio with bearns strong enough to support further rooms
on top was one of the main factors in planning the accommodation this
way up, but even when reinforced concrete had obviated this difficulty,
this arrangement remains the custom—-though Perret, for instance, inverts
it in the Orloff house, and has a ground-floor studio. The other form of
section, with the smaller rooms behind the studio was the particular pre-
ference of Le Corbusier, who continued to use the long narrow plan with
double-height studio and sleeping balcony even in his designs of the Fifties
{as the flats at Marseilles) even in buildings that were not studio-houses
(where the high room becomes a Living room) and even in buildings that
were not on long narrow sites {as the single house at Weissenhof) and did
not need to have their fenestration confined to their end-vwalls.

There was a sharp divergence in the way in which architects faced the
problem of the studio-house facade. The north-light window gives on to
the street much more often than a statistical average would fead one to
expect, and thus has to share the elevation with an entrance, probably gar-
age doors and one or more small windows. Perret and his followers employ
a strongly accentuated exposed frame, and distribute the various openings
within it in such a way as to create at least an illusion of symmetry. The
others, Mallet-Stevens, Lurcat, Le Corbusier and their followers, who were
responsible for something like four studies out of every five in the Twenties,
exploit the difference in size and function of the openings to create an

asymmetrical pattern of holes pierced in a flat white surface,® on which an
all-over rendering has been spread to obliterate the distinction between
support and load, frame and fill,

For this they could plead the support of traditton—not the tradition of
the professional architects, but that of the vernacular buildings of the Paria
region, for the city still affords many examples of unpretentious utilitarian
butldings, with windows of various sizes set asymmetrically in white-
tendered walls. Attention had been drawn to such buildings by the
paintings of Utrillo, which take them as their prime subject-matter, and by
the Cubo-Futurist magazine Sie which exhorted its readers in 1916

Aimona la maison nevuve
Aimons la maison blanche

which, judging from the elaborate surface finishes preferred by professional
architects of the period, can only refer to whitewashed vernacular buildings.

But Le Corbusier, at least, had other reasons for admiring whitewashed
architecture, reasons that seem to be involved with his own experiences
as a painter, and his theories about the beauty of banality. In reviewing the
architectural section of the Salon d’Auiomne of 1922 in L'Esprit Nouveau
he wrote, complaining of a preoccupation with de duxe materials.

Té the house is entirely white, the design of things stands out without possible
transpression, the volumes of things appear clearly, the colour of things is
explicit.
So far, he could be a painter extolling the virtues of working on a white
ground, but he pursues the theme to the point where whitewash becomes 2
sort of couleur-type, with fotkloristic overtones.

Whitewash is absolute; on it, everything atands out, inscribes itself absolutely:
it is sincere and loyal. Whitewash is the riches of poor and rich, of all men—
just as bread, milk and water are the riches of the slave and the king.

Thus, the vernacular architecture of Paris provokes him to reflections that
reach deeply into his experience and theories, but it also provoked him to
conceive something more specific: the project for the Matson Citrohan.
This simple house is almost a pure studte-type, but he provides for it a
derivation as characteristically unexpected as it is deeply indebted to the
authority of the vernacular®

We were eating in a little cabbie's restaurant in the middle of Paris. There was a
bar (zinc), the kitchen at the back, a garret-floor divides the height of the

‘In the Rue du Belvedere, Boulogne-sur-Seine, and in the villa Seurat, off the
Rue de la Tombe-Issoire, the Perret solution, and that favoured by the younger
Modemists can be found elmost next door to one another.

‘ This is wisdom after the event, not a comtemporary record of his feelings, and
did not appear in print until Volume I of the Guere Compléte, p. 31. The windows
in question had tall narrow panes which can still be found on older industrial
buildings all over the Paris area, as well as on the electricity sub-stations built in
the early Twenties.

a

premises in two, the front opens directly on the street. Simplification of source
of kumination—just one big bay at each end; two lateral bearing walls, a flat rooé
on top: a veritable box that could usefully become a house.
while the fenestration of Alatson Cifrohan, like that of the bulk of the studio-
houses standing in Paris at that time (1920) drew on another vernacular
tradition.
We had observed that the glazing of factories in the Paris suburbs let light in and
kept thieves out without any difficult joinery. And was very attractive aestheti-
cally, judiciously used,
But Citrehan 1s an admitted pun on Cifroé#, and raises a problem that can
only be discussed in the context af Le Corbusier's first book over that
famous signature, Vers une Architecture,

17: Vers une Architecture

LE CORBUSIER’S FERST book on architecture, which was to prove to be one
of the most influential, widely read and least understood of all the archi-
tectural writings of the twentieth century, was put together in the last
months of a long pause in his architectural activity—the articles in L’ Esprit
Nouveau, from which it was contrived, had all appeared by January 1922,
some months befere that year’s Salon d'Automne brought him in contact
with the client for whom he built his first Modern house, the little villa at
Vaucresson. So great was the change that had come over his architectural
ideas in this pause, from 1917 to 1923, that he has subsequently suppressed
the work of the earlier phase, though in 1921, before the Citrohan project
had taken its final form, he was still sufficiently pleased with the last of
these early works, a house at Chaux-de-Fonds, to have it published at
length in L'Esprit Newveaw, and to use it to make a point in Vers une
Architecture,

Indeed, for a house of 1917, it was nothing te be ashamed of. It shows
similar kind of brisk, up-to-the-minute eclecticism to that of Gropius’s
Werkbund Pavilion at Cologne, three years earlier, though one of its
stylistic sources may have been the reasons for its later suppression from
the Corbusian canon. He records that the client, seeing a project of Perret’s
among a portfolio of Le Corbusier’s own designs said

Faites-moi quelque chose de semblable

(Make me something I:ke that}
and the resultant building, though far from semblable, is unmistakably
Perretesque in its general conception, which may well have been an embar-
rassment ta him after he changed his attitude to Perret in 1923. However,
the design has other sources as well; the Beaux-Arts tradition has been laid
under tribute for much of the detailing, the overall massing bears a striking
(if coincidental} resemblance to Philibert del'Orme's gate-house at Anet,
though the treatment of the apsidal wings seems indebted more directly to
Hoffmann’s Villa Ast, and the general iayout of the interior is markedly
Wrightian, a double-height living room, with an access-balcony serving
the bedrooms, forming the central volume of an open cruciform plan, in

the manner of the Roberts House of 1907, This may have been a source of
embarrassment to him, for his attitude to Wright was rather ambivalent.
He knew Berlage too well not to be acquainted with Wright’s work, and
told Sigfried Giedion that he had actually heard Berlape’s lecture of 19173,
but when Wijdeveld asked him to contribute to the special issue of Wen-
dingen devoted to Wright, he is reported to have replied ‘Connais pas cet
architecte’.

Even if he was not pleased with the aesthetics of this house, its technical
qualities should have continued to gratify him. It has flat roofs draining to
mternal run-off pipes, a device which was, even in 1926, of great conse~-
quence to him as a way of avoiding the disastrous results of ridge-melting
and eaves-freezing of pitched roofs under snow, a serious menace to build-
ing in Chaux-de-Fonds. Further, it shares with van t’Hoff’s villa at Huis
ter Heide the distinction of being the first concrete-framed villa in Europe,
and its mode of construction was of the greatest technical interest. The
frame and roof-slabs were put up between the end of August and the onset
of the winter’s snows, at which point building-work in Chaux-de-Fonds
normally ceased, but with the roofs already up, it was possible to preceed
with building right through the winter—albeit at the cost of using warmed
bricks and anti-freeze in the mortar,

But all this was to be put away when he conceived the Citrohan project

With this house we tumed our backs on the architectural ideas of the Academic
schools—and the Modern ones too.

As has been said, the invented name Citrokan was a conscious pun
To avoid saying ‘Citroén'. In other words, a house like a car

a concept that introduces two other important lines of thought besides those
that have already been discussed in connection with this project. On the
one hand there was the cut-to-the-bone aesthetic of ‘Owfilage’, of equip-
ment as against furniture; on the other hand was the dream of a mass-
produced #aison-fype, and in 1919, when the basic form of the Mfazson
Citrohan was taking shape in his mind, this dream appeared to be on the
point of realisation. The Voisin Company, at the termination of its war-
time aircraft contracts (like other aircraft companies after the Second
World War) tried to keep its plant occupied by breaking into the housing
business. At least two prototypes of the Maison Voisin were built, one
plain, one fancy, and neither of them very distinguished architecturally,
though they present the technical peculiarity {presumably derived from
aircraft practice) that their roof-trusses span the longer dimension of the
rectangular plan, not the shorter, and the gables, in consequence, are on
the sides, not the ends of the house.

1 This is reply as André Lurcat gave it me. Wijdeveld’a own version is given by
N. Pevener in the Architects’ Journal (London, 4 May 1939, p. 732).

Le Corbusier himself will not admit to any part in their design, but his
description of them? shows that they lay very close to his own ideas.
Up tll now it seerned that a house must be heavily attached to the soil, by the
depth of its foundations, the weight of its thick walla... , It is no trick that the
Matson Votsin is one of the first to mark the exact reversal of this conception.
The science of building has evolved in a shattering manner in recent times, The
art of building has struck root firmly in science.
The statement of the problem by itself indicated the means of resliaation,
powerfully affirming the immense revelution on which architecture has em-
barked. When the art of building ia modified to such an extent, established aeathe-
tics of construction are automatically over-thrown.
Thus far, Choisy up-to-date. Next, having posed the problem of post-
War building in terms of a shortage of skilled labour overwhelmed by an
almost unlimited demand for houses, he adopts a more Futurist tone.
... impossible to wait on the slow collaboration of the successive efforts of exca-
vator, mason, carpenter, joiner, tiler, plumber... Aowses must go up all of a piece,

made by machine tools in a factory, assembled as Ford assembles cars, on moving
convepor belts,

Meanwhile, aviation was achieving prodigies of serial production, An aeroplane
is a little house that can fly and resist the storm.
It is in aircraft factories that the soldier-architects have decided to build their
houses; they decided to build this house like an aircraft, with the same struc-
tural methods, lightweight framing, metal bracers, tubular supports,
A house built like an aeroplane would be a very fair realisation of the kind
of architecture that Sant’Elia had demanded, built of light-weight replace-
ments for brick, stone and wood, and a knowledge of Sant’ Elia’s views
probably hes at the back of the enthustastic tone of this passage, but his
concluding remarks seem to return to his desire for simplicity and nor-
ality; he appears to specify for this house an Aab:tant-type.
These lightweight houses, supple and strong as car-bodies or airframes, are
ingenious in plan: they offer the comforts a wise man might demand. To
inhabit such houses one needs the mind of 2 sage, animated by L'Esprit Nouveau,
A generation is coming to birth that will know how to live in Matsons Votses.
Although the Mazson Voisin itself does not appear in Vers une Architecture
(nor do Perret’s studies for mass-production houses, in spite of the fact
that they had appeared in L'Esprit Nouveau), the idea of the marson
fabriquée en série, the matson-outil, the matson-type, and various other
isotopes of the machine 4 habiter are very much in evidence. However, they
appear only in certain parts of a book whose parts are 80 curiously related that
the effective significance of the concept can only be disentangled by taking
the argument completely apart, and scrutinising the pieces separately.
No great violence is thereby done, because Vers une Architecture has
no argument in any normal sense of the word. It has, instead, a series of
rhetorical or rhapsodical essays on a limited number of themes, assembled
side by side in such a way as to give the impression that these themes have

* The account of the Voisin house will be found in L'Esprit Nouveau, No. 2,
p. 211.

some necessary connection. All but one of these essays had appeared in
L'Esprit Nouveau, though not quite in the order of the book, and most of
them are reproduit tel, page for page. Two main themes can be distinguished
at once, and can be roughly labelled Academic and Mechanistic. All the
essays can be put under one or other of these headings in terms of their
main subject-matter, and they are grouped in the book in a manner which
emphasises this distinction. Thus, the Academic material comes in two
compact blocks, the first labelled ‘Trats Rappels d MM les Architectes’,
dealing with Surface, Volume and Plan, followed immediately by one on
‘Tracés Régulateurs’. The second block, headed ‘Architecture’, contains
three essays devoted to ‘The Lesson of Rome’, ‘The Illusion of Plans’,
and ‘Pure Creation of the Mind”.

The Mechanistic essays are fitted around these two blocks as follows:
first (in the book, but not in the magazine) ‘Esthétique de P ingenieur’; next,
after the ‘Rappels’, a section of three essays under the heading ‘Des Yeux
qui ne Votent pas’, dealing with Liners, Aircraft, and Automobiles; and
finally, after ‘Architecture’, the chapter on mass-production houses, and
an entirely new one entitled ‘Architecture ou Revolution’. As will be seen,
although the book opens on a Mechanistic note, the chapters which actually
deal with the virtues of machinery are firmly sandwiched between two
sections whose main function is to rehearse the more Abstract and Classical
—large et sévére—ideas of the Academic tradition, so that the reader who
goes straight through the book gets the impression that he is being con-
ducted through an orderly argument in which machine-design stands as
a necessary intermediate stage between certain Abstract fundamentals of
design and the glories of the Parthenon. This impression is reinforced by
a judicious intermixture of themes in the illustrations and captions. Thus,
Plan and Surface are illustrated by photographs of grain silos and American
factory buildings respectively, while Pure Creation haa its photographs
of the Parthenon and the Propylaea captioned with phrases such as

Yoici la machine & émouvoir
Or

All this plastic machinery is realised in marble with the rigour thet we have
learned to apply in the machine. The impression is of naked, polished steel.
This interfusion of the Mechanical and the Classical achieves a kind of
apotheosis in the chapter on Automobiles. Here on a pair of facing pages
the reader finds, at the top, the Basilica at Paestum on the left, the Par-
thenon on the right, and, below, a Humber of 1907 and a Delage of the early
‘Twenties. On reflection the reader realises that this is supposed to be read
from page to page, implying an equivalent progress between Humber and
Delage and between Paestum and Acropolis, but the immediate response
seems always to be to read down the page, thus producing an image of
contrast, like Marinetti’a between a racing car and the Nike of Samothrace,

The four illustrations together are clearly intended to be read in some such
sense, as well as that of progress in design, and this is hardly surprising,
for other versions of the Marinettian image were current in Paris at the
time, Thus, in February 1922, Francis Picabia mangled it® to suit his own
ends as

Tristan Tzara ... has decided to put his top hat on a locomotive: obviously,
that is easier than putting it an the Mictery of Samothrace

and in 1927 a reader of L’ Effort Moderne cornplained

Walking down the Champs Elysées, I saw, on a car displayed in the premises of
a motor manufacturer, a radiator cap representing a miniature Victory of
Sarmothrace,' lookmge completely ndiculous, and quite contrary to the precise,
simple and logical order of the car itself.
But Le Corbusier's intention is not to present a contradiction d’esprit
between the Mechanical and the Classical. Quite the other way about, he
proposed, following the line established by Severin and Gleizes, to estab~
lish an analogy, if not an equivalence between the two

This precision, this cleanliness in execution go farther back than our reborn
mechanical sense. Phidias felt in this way: the entablature of the Parthenon is a
WitNESS,
and throughout the beok, Classical architecture and Machine design are
represented as having in common such ideas as ‘selection applied to a
standard’, and the paring away of accidents from a type.

Bearing this supposed analogy or equivalence in mind, we can now turn
to the content of the individual essays, taking first those on Academic
themes, because they reveal Le Corbusier’s aesthetic processes. The three
Rappels are united by the proposition

Mass and surface are the elements by which architecture manifests itself. Mase

and surface are determined by the plan. The plan is the generator.
and the first chapter, on Volume (Mass), opens with the much-quoted
statement

L' Architecture est le jeu savant, correct et maguifique dea volumes assemblés

sous la lumuére.

(Architecture is the masterly, correct and magnificent play of masses brought

together in light.)

Typically, this contains a proposition so commonsensical as to be self-
‘evident—architecture is a play of volumes appreciated by the eyes—into
which are injected the intangibles savant, correct et magnifique, and the
loaded word assembiés. If, as seems likely, it is the assemblage which has to
be correct, etc. then we appear to be dealing with something like Guadet’s
composition (which can be confirmed by examination of Le Corbusier’s
other writings and his buildings) and, in that case, the three intangibles

*In the pamphlet Pomme du Pin, which he published in St Raphaél in 1922.
‘ This must, almost certainly, have been a Rolla-Royce.


are not beyond interpretation, Correct implies a standard of judgement,
or a body of rules, Savant that this standard or those rules are known and
understood, and Magnifique that they are applied, probably, with talent or
imagination. But the precise nature of the rules ts left ambiguous—early
in the chapter they appear to consist in the employment of the regular
Phileban solids

.. - Cubes, cones, spheres, cylinders or pyramids are the great primary forms
which light reveals to advantage .. . these are beautiful forms, the most beautiful
forms.
whereas at the end of this same chapter, when he discusses American grain
silos more specifically, the rules appear to be the laws of nature
Not in pursuit of an architectural idea, but simply guided by the results of
calculation (derived from the principles which govern our universe) and the
conception of a living organism, the engineers of today make use of primary
elements and, by co-ordinating them in accordance with the rules, provoke in us
architectural emotions, and thus make the work of man ring in unison with the
universal order
This paragraph is crucial to this part of the argument, and to a great deal
else in the book. ‘The formes primatres of the earlier quotation are rendered
fully Guadetesque by becoming éléments prinaires (easy enough with grain
silos, where the functional compenents approximate so closely to the
Phileban solids) co-ordinated suivant les régles. But a new ambiguity enters
—are these régles to be equated with the principer qui gérent notre univers?
Though there is no external reason why they should be, it seems necessary
to Le Corbusier’s argument that some such equivalence be accepted by
the reader, otherwise the accordance of the non-architectural forms of the
silos with his own aesthetic preferences may be no more than a coincidence.
A somewhat similar procedure is followed for Surface, illustrated by
views of concrete-framed factories to exemplify the formules d'atéler
‘accuser la forme’ and ‘modeler Ja surface’, but the chapter on Plan is
different. Here silos and factories fail him, and he fails back on illustrations
from Choisy’s Histoire, Garnier and Ferret. The familiar illustrations from
Choisy make the connection between plan and the total form of a building
very visible, but they do not, in themselves, make it clear to what extent
the plan creates the form, and to what extent it derives from the form and
the techniques used to create it—t.e. bay-widths that can be spanned,
thickness of wall required to support various kinds of roof. Le Corbusier
does not even allude to this second possibility—for him there is no question
of the primacy of plan.
The plan ig at its basis... . The plan bears within itself a primary and pre-
determined rhythm... . ‘The plan carries in itself the very essence of sensation,
This hammering of the importance of the plan echoes, if it does not repeat
in detail, the weight attached ta the elegancies of the paper pattern of a
building’s plan at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, where, following Guadet, the

elements of a building being of conventional form and structure, their dis-
tribution on plan did largely determine the appearance of the exterior.
But Le Corbusier seems also to have had in his mind the idea of plans
as a species of Secret Professionei, for this idea appears in the writings,
very much under his influence, of Pierre Urbain, who speaks® of the lay
public as being
. rarely in a position to understand the influence of its own needs on the
architecture of its time, since they affect above all the plan, and only a professional
education of a sufficiently advanced standard permits one te judge that, or even
to Tread its disposition,
In any case, having declared the determining influence of the plan, Le
Corbusier then undermines his case by offering m the next chapter an
almost independent aesthetic order for the elevations—Les Tracés Régu-
lateurs, So strongly does he feel about them that he not only declares them
to be good and necessary, but makes an appeal to history as well
But the past has left us preofs, iconographics] documents, steles, slabs, in-
scribed stones, parchimernts, manuscripts, printed matter... .
Unfortunately his use of historical evidence is sloppy in the extreme, and
so this chapter shows him in a bad light. Lines inked on photographs of the
Porte Saint Denis and the facade of Notre Dame are an inaccurate version
of Blondel’s diagram in the first instance, and over 2 foot thick to scale in
the second; these on photographs of the Capitol at Rome and the Petit
Trianon are more convincing because they demonstrate nothing that one
does not feel, as Choisy did about Serlio, to have been impossible to demon-
strate by simple numbers. Where he relies on book-learning he inspires
even less confidence: he has patently misunderstood Choisy’s reconstruc-
tion of the facade of the arsenal of the Piraeus and believes it to be a copy
of an original Greek drawing, while one of the two diagrams of Achemenid
domes that he reproduces out of Dieulafoy is so inaccurately drawn as to
suggest that he had not understood the form of the building,
Nevertheless, the drift of these first four Academic chapters is clear
enough: he prefers an architecture of geometrical forms so elementary
that the main art of design jies in their distribution in plan, and in the
distribution of the incidents on their surfaces. The second Academic
group takes up a different theme: that Functionalism is not enough.
Architecture goes beyond utilitarian needa.
You employ stone, wood and concrete, and with these materials you build houses
and palaces. That is construction. Ingenuity is at work. But suddenly you
touch my heart, you do me good, I am happy and I say “This is beautiful’.
That is Architecture, Art enters in,
Each chapter of this section is concerned with spiritual qualities in some
way, the third specifically so. The first, ‘The Lesson of Rome’, praises the
ancient Romans for their devotion to the regular Phileban Solids, and for
4 Also in the special isaue of the Journal de Psychologre Normale.

ee


their sense of order; from mediaeval Rome it ainglea out Santa Maria in
Cosmedin for its abstinence and simplicity, and the architecture of its
ambones (to which his attention had probably been directed by Choisy’s
account of the liturgical furniture in San Clemente); from Renaissance
Rome he singles out Michelangelo, whom he places on a level with Phidias
at the summit cf human achievement, and in a justly celebrated passage
be praises St Peter’s for its

. gigantic geometry of harmonious relationahips . . . the mouldings are of an
intensely passionate character, harsh and pathetic. —
Finally, he denounces fa Rome des Horreurs, Rome from Vignola to Victor
Emmanvel, and concludes
The Grand Prix de Rome and the Villa Medici are the cancer of French archi-
tecture.
The next chapter, “The Iluston of Plans’, continues this attack on the
Ecole but, as might be expected in view of the earlier chapter in praise of
the plan, the attack ia not radical.
In a great public institution, the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, the principles of good
planning have been studied, and then, as time has gone by, dogmas have been
established, and recipes and tricks, A method of teaching useful enough at the
beginning has become a dangerous practice.
The particular dangerous practice to which he objects is an excess of
emphasis on the plan as a work of art in its own right, and chiefly, star-
planning for its own sake, Against this he insists that

A plan proceeds from within to without

and then, contrariwise, gives an account of the intericr volumes of the
Green Mosque at Brousa in the opposite direction, as seen by a visitor
proceeding from the outside inwards, However, this little exercise in the
description of a building's interior, as actually seen, gives 2 useful clue
to the meaning of an obscure and over-wrought chapter. In the descrip-
tions of real buildings and actual archaeological sites it is clear that when
he says plan what he usually means is 2 sequence of interior volumes as the
visitor actually experiences them, and when he says axis, he means the
route by which they are traversed, or a vista along which they can be
stern

The axis of the Acropolis rune from the Piraeus to Pentelicus, from the

mountain to the sea
and this, taken in conjunction with some very perceptive evaluations of
the visual siting and walkable topology of the Acropolis, the Forum at
Pompeii, and Hadrian's villa, seems te reveal a revival in very personal
and rather mystical terms

Yaxe est dans les intentions. . .
of Choiay's Picturesque evaluations of some of the same monuments—

in fact, Choisy’s illustrations of the Acropolis appear once more in this
chapter.

The third part of ‘Architecture’, ‘Pure Creation of the Mind’, consists
chiefly of reproductions of some extremely good photographs of ancient
Greek architecture, supported by a text and captions that make two points.
Firstly against Functionalism, and alse against such associated nineteenth-
century concepts as Naturalism, as m the following, dubiously based on
personal observation

Certain writers have declared that the Dorie column was inspired by 2 tree
springing from the earth, without a base, etc. . . , It is most false, since the tree
with straight trunk is unknow nin Greece, where only stunted pines and twisted
olives prow. The Greeks created a plastic system . , . 80 pure that it gives almost
the feeling of a natural growth. But nonetheless, it is entirely man’s creation. . . .

This coincidence of the natural and the human is attributed to a
concordance avec l'axe qui est en l'homme

which returns us to the subject of the previous chapter.

‘The second point which is made is that which, almost alone, relates the
Academic chapters to the Mechanistic half of the book. The point is made,
obliquely at the very beginning of the chapter

Profile and contour (1.6, Modénature} are the touchstone of the Architect. Here

he reveals himself as artist or mere engineer.
and yet, in spite of this lower valuation placed upon engineers, his standard
terms of praise in the captions to detail photographs of the modénature of
flutings, echinoi, guttae, etc. are drawn from engineering.

The curve of the echinus is as rational as that of a large shell. The section of the

comice is as tight as an engincer’s outline.

The intention is clear: contemporary technology is te be held up as an
example to contemporary architecture in decline from Greek standards of
moralité dorique, This is explicit from the opening words of the first
chapter of the book

The engineer’s aesthetic and architecture—two things that march together and

follow from one another—the one at its full height, the other in an unhappy

state of retrogression

and this unfavourable comparison is rubbed in again and again throughout
the first chapter.

There exists in France a great national school of architecture, and there are,
in every country, architectural schools of various kinds, to mystify young minds
and teach thern the obsequiousness of the toady,

Qur engineers are healthy and virile, active and useful, balanced and happy im
their work, Our architects are disillusioned and unemployed, boastful or

evish.

Architects, emerging from the schools, ... enter In the town in the spirit of a
milkman who should, as it were, sell his milk mixed with vitriol or poison.

Besides this elevation of the engineer to the statua of a noble savage of

a

So. Raymond
Duchamp-Villon, La
Fitla Cybtste (model of
facade}, 1912: the
application of Cubist-
style forms in place of
traditional decoration.
81, Charles Edouard
Jeanneret {Le
Corbusier). Peinture,
1926, Programmatic
Purist painting with
objects projected
according te Princet’s
theory of types.


84. Henn Sauvage. Flats in Rue des Amiraux,
Paris, 1924. Futurist in derivation, from Sant’
Elia’s case a gradinati, this block is rare in Paris
at the time for its size and its wide frontage.
45. K. ‘elnikev, Russian Pavilion at the
Exposition des Arts Décoratif:, Paris, 1925, the
first sight of the new Russian architecture in
the Wesr.


86. Andre Lurcat, Studio house in Rue de Belvedere,
Paris, 1926. The function, site and form are all rypical
of the basic building type that was the mainstay of early
modem architecture in Paris.

87, 88. Studia flat in the Houlevard Rochechouart,
Paris, anc a saddler’s shop near the Place du Tertre,
Paris: the raw materials, functionally and formally, of
the malem studi house vernacular.


#9. Le Curbusier, Project for Maison
Citrohan, 1920: the forms of a typical studio-
house raised to the level of a universal mass-
produced dwelling, comparable to a car in
price and availability. Yee, OF CAL


“ap Qotuc une

ap je ssordoad ayl pure adie | yaaie) ayy jo ssardoid
SY} | ATAUTYSELY POE AINSS] FYI IO woREEMLIOD
[PUAN YUE PUB AUT [Ay ROLY Sil] apeta azay Jatenquey)
ay] ‘earogeyyy 8 AROY JO JUaasTUTUGAI AWeunoe

pun Aydewtod dy 8 jew £201 ‘sey aanposeyesE

aut saa p WoESNquor ary wel Fuluado ageg ‘6

“(of pug G2 ery (4) $161 yo uolpraEgy

Pern yi 44 Aadays pup snidoge) st Ws oaple
Pur onhiuyaay yu aE |g si un apqeueduzas
"2047119. UE SH daadedo PRLY LENO) ary JO Hoan 1Se]
TUL UGE PNA AgI AMS ‘EpUD., ap MNEYD BY OT ETE A
‘(Jaren to7 a7 [} je. penopy Bape +16 ‘OG

wey Tra

brated =|


yer ee ee he) be ed So a peg peter i a pep op per pe DL pote
. mene, aU cee aden ep apa ee a Pee Dr Ager g

perverag ap enim pte arpa ee ae po py em My SHOW

waathisel Ts

see erence) ea ee LE ye PU

ee ee Le

rt) PT ee ce CLL) LL
wea te oantiaphbe wed pees tye q

Pee Ce ee | ee er | re

20 ee il

“yea bed I ta an

g3. Le Corbusier, Externor of the Pavillon def Esprit Nouveau, Exposition
des Arts Decoratifs, Paris, 1925: this half of the pavilion was one unit from
the Immeuble-villas project—each unit was, effectively, a Maison Citrohan
and a garden terrace.

g4. Le Corbusier. Interior of the Pavilion de P Esprit Nouveau, Paris, 1925:
furnished with equipment from manufacturers’ catalogues (cf. fig. 84).


= Zé
ae . y
ELSE bere
4e Eveees
Oe TSE

EES SC ES
$Oterg ou
25 583 §.5 &s.
Shs as She

4g 3h 13
eas iliesé

aes
oe
Beck eg
dOgz Es
Bgh2 Ss
Botan s
-DEge se
Seg ge'gs
beeen se
Corser:
6 S45 8
SSma S E


4 se
a

; ar a. . 7 Pei ana: is - 3503 aay ~ en pure ts reste A
aan bes sir ayia anibigno WOsTHLE oraz, a ‘ead ourte ou jomdnag ap BIOPE,] SU2 UA oypadion
i9e6u ‘syeg ‘auiag-ans- audaneg "HOOT HFA “asuUKe lL aIaT YY PUB IaEengi0-) aT “96 ‘£6


souisoddo ‘qoo7y ETE

STU t ee A os ee Wipsays ath ARpLopun JEU] Fl atysaE
0) Ee hc cL | “LUG Wap 8 oP SsnoLuey
eA gy SLU UTNE ASU], UE TO) MIE] apa AZ
ate a eg OA) UL SAD PUTAS Pte BAN3O118

seg ON pOWAL po SUMMIT ETD Tarsnques ay coor ‘oh

AL Me EI
u| ragauaf

UN USAT Re oe] LE AE AE Peay up sts Opty ie Laytesacd ag
ata mesdit yn a ka Ee | “Arner pied oon] ooseeok enya
UE Le a | sep A Saad Le BIECHE| Wars Teed ey nb [HE apta
Teed WED OA PU e1 BY "ae Ler) Uae het LUTE Ls aa sibs HP uunyaas op
SATU ye eae ey peated peeuienee OU Sl ed OL aul “ILE
Se URE She waa vA PA Ut ts jtusag TET ty | cede Fain
Sree met des) spuegiyed ay spied pease dele sage gop no sa] equal

Dae dent or iii,

ve ey Pry of hae

1 aq (al coeek kek TERS

ore PT ee Co ce bee ee |

IE HE]

TL CO ee LL Le GL ee Ll LL |

Se eR ee 9 a

TOPE L MUCUS L CR DO CO Oat Leh eR a

ee [Hal mp ee ee]
ols

“AE HLA pe
SelE-G dep oan eeu vet pnds peap! wep Sytpes tO] aT
AMG coy ds MMHG tog aed EL gp sapepooy sama

+ Ad
mo ry 4 =)

Ved GS
maa

al HORT aapusirng 8 habia.) wp aoenmpaiy 7
tu ekanttint a poktint Muhbasanrone — Waemdanue #4


_ el, t

dG A ad 2 a a.

101, 102. Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret. [es
fTerrasses, Garches, 1927-1924: the most complete
demonstration of tc Corbusier's aesthetics of 1926,
formal, classicizing in elevation, free mn plan in spite of
the regular grid of columns, violent in the penetrations
from foor to flour.

ee it


design, in the tradition of Marinetti and Loos, and a pre-statement (in the
magazine a restatement) of the theme:
The purpose of construction is to make things hold together; of architecture to
move us.
This first chapter introduces the concept of the house as an oti, and with
itan eulogy of the morality of scrapping that is an extension of the Futurists’
‘Our houses will lost less time than we do’.
A question of morality, Lack of truth is intolerable, we perish m untruth,
Architecture ia one of the most urgent needs of man, for the house has always
been the indispensable and first too) that he has forged for himself, Man's stock

of tools marks out the stages of civilisation . .. the result of successive improve-
ments, the effort of ali generations is embodied in them.

Having thus combined the ideas of Choisy and Paul Valéry, Le Corbusier
makes the point that the generations have collaborated in these successive
perfectionings chiefly by throwing away the products of their forefathers
We throw the out-of-date teol on the scrap-heap: the carbine, the culverin, the
growier and the old locomotive. This action is a manifestation of health, of moral
health, of morale also; it is not right that we should produce bad things because

of a bad tool, nor is it right that we should waste our energy, our health and our
courage because of a bad tool: ic must be thrown away and replaced.

But houses, for various reasons, have not been scrapped and replaced.

Architects work in ‘stylea’ or discuss questions of structure in and out of
season: their clients, the public, still think in terms of conventional appearance,
and reason on the foundation of insufficient education. Our external world has
been enormously transformed in its outward appearance and in the use made of it,
by reason of the machine. We have gained a new perspective and a new social
life, but we have not yet adapted the house thereto.
Here one may distinguish two major concepts: the establishment of per-
fected objects (types) by scrapping; and the creation of a new mechanised
environment in which neither the stylistic interests of the Beaux-Arts,
nor the structural Rationalism of the Polytechnique are of any service. In
both these concepts technology stands simultaneously as a critique of
present conditions and a standard of emulation for the future, and it
occupies the same two positions not only throughout the rest of this chapter,
but also throughout the rest of the argument, particularly in the section
‘Des Yeux Out Ne Votent Pas’.

In the first of these chapters, on Liners, it is used to establish the true
style, as he saw it, of the times. It opens with a flurry of polemics against
a school of designers, whose public advecate was Guillaume Janneau,
who had committed the unforgivable crime of using Traces Régulateurs to
create old-fashioned ‘stylistic’ (sct/. Classicised Art Nouveau) decoration,
Since he maintained that

Architecture has nothing to do with the various ‘atyles’.
he found himself forced to suggest what it did have to do with, and, like
Mondriaan, Oud, and many others be has to propose, first, that

-~_ . m<ncr 4

Our own epoch is determining, day by day, its own style

and secondly that this style is to be found in a list of objects that are (al-

most inevitably} a conglobation of Futurist and Werkbund preferences,
though slanted toward objets-type

Our modern life... has created its own objects, its costume, its fountain pen,
its eversharp pencil, its typewriter, its telephone, its admirable office-furnicure,
its plate glass and its ‘Innovation’ trunks, the safety razor and the briar pipe,
the bowler hat and the limousine, the steamship and the airplane.
The reasons why these odjets-type fix the style is clear enough, they fit in
so well with his Phileban preferences, though Le Corbusier soon squelches
any hope that he might admit to this by saying in the next chapter

The lesson of the airplane is not primarily in the forms it has created

though one cannot help noticing that he selects aircraft of regular Phileban,
not to say Palladian, forms, and when he comes to discuss the benefits of
streamlining, dees so only in so far aa it applies to airships and cars.

Thus, although the main business of these three chapters is, he claims,
maniéres de penser, and not with formal problems, the illustrations con-
stantly reaffirm his aesthetic admirations, adorning rather than advancing
the argument. ‘Thus, though the chapter on automobiles is professedly
concerned with the virtues of standardisation and the benefits of competi-
tion, it is not illustrated by any vehicles that could be considered standard-
ised (except in the low-ievel sense of all having a wheel at each corner)
or successfully competitive in either commerce or sport. The function of
most of the illustrations is to maintain a kind of running visual sermon
on aesthetic probity, just as he reads one on moraitté dortque into the stones
of the Parthenon, At the same time they provoke him to thoughts of the
following order: about liners

If we forget for a moment that a steamship is a machine for transport and look
at it with a fresh eye, we shall feel that we are facing an important manifestation
of temerity, of discipline, of harmony, of beauty that ts calm, vital and strong.
A seriqusly-minded architect, looking at it es an architect (i.e. a creator of organ-
jams), will find in a steamship his freedom from an age-long bur contemptible
enslavement to the past,

about aircraft

‘The problem of the house has not yet been stated.

The airplane shows us that a problem well stated finds its solution. To wish
to fly like @ bird is to state the problem badly, and Ader’s Bat never left the
ground .., to search for a means of suspension in the air, and a means of pro-

pulsion, was to put the problem properly:* in less chan ten years the whole world
could fy,

*Tt is worth noting that he does not discuss the problem of penetration in this
context, nor that of controls—that is, he statea the problem of aviation as Chanute
or Lilienthal stated it, but whether he did so with knowledge of their work is not
clear, Ironicaliy enough the Ader Bat was proved to be just capable of flight before
L'Esprit Nouveau had ceased publication, and the fact was noted in its pages, with-

ae.


about cars

Let us display then, the Parthenon and the motor-car so that it may be clear
that it is a question of two products of selection in different fields.... And what
then? Well, it remains to use the motor-car as a challenge to aur houses and our
great buildings, It is here that we come to a dead stop, ‘Rien ne va plus.’ Here
we have no Parthenons.
However, ‘Des Yeux Qui Ne Votent Pas’, viewed as a whole, is chiefly
notable as the main vehicle for Le Corbusier's ideas on house design.

These ideas are professedly of only technical import
The standard of the house is a question of practical and constructive order,

under the much-quoted rubric (which, however, never appears in the body
of that chapter)

La maison est une machine 4 habiter,

(The house is a machine for living in.)
and they are summed up, in their purely technical aspects, in the Manuel
def’ Habitation (which appears at the end of the chapter on Aircraft) with
its famous slogans

Demand a bathroom looking south, one of the largest rooms in the house. . .

Demand bare walls .. . built-in fittings to take the place of much of the furniture

If you can, put the kitchen on top of the house to avoid smells. . .

Demand concealed or diffused dighting.

Demand a vacuum-cleaner,

Teach your children that a house is only habitable when it is full of light and

air, when the floors and wails are clear,

Take a flat that is one size smaller than what your parents accustomed you to. ...
This document is clearly (and admittediy) addressed more to the lay
public than to architects, and may be regarded as a kind of prospectus
of life as it would be led in the mass-produced houses he had envisaged,
for the closing words of the footnote at the end of the chapter are

.. constmiire en série des machines 4 habiter

and clearly refer forward to Mazsons en Série.

But before the reader reaches this chapter, he is presented with the three
that make up ‘Architecture’, and has had it hammered into him that
Functionalism is not enough. If he has been persuaded by what has gone
before, the reader will, presumably, take it that the projects that are repro-
duced in Maisons en Série are more than functional, are architecture.
But, in fact, Le Corbusier's closing remarks on the subject suggest that
they are not, as will be seen later. The bulk of the chapter is occupied
by a survey of the author’s own projects in the field of mass-production
housing, space for a very full coverage having been created by the sup-
pression of the two pages devoted to Auguste Perret that had appeared in
out any comment beyond that it contributed to the glory of France as the pioneer

country of aviation! The question of penetration, or strearnlining, is discussed later
in Vers une Architecture, but without reference to airplanes!

LE’ Esprit Nowveau. The schemes can be characterised by the constructional
methods employed: Dom-ine (concrete post and slab), Monod (mass-walling
in various materials and segmental concrete vaults) and Citrehan (side
walls and concrete joists). The culmination comes with the bameubles-
Villas, in which dwelling units, each consisting of a modified Citrokan
house with a garden court alongside it, are assembled inte gigantic blocks five
or six houses high, and up ta twelve units long, facing inwards on to garden
courts and with complicated multi-level services and roads running be-
tween the backs of neighbouring pairs of blocks, Food, drink and domestic
service were to be provided on an hotel basis, car-parking underground,
below the gardens and sports fields.

The scale, the town-planning assumptions, the way of life envisaged for
the inhabitants are Futurist, while the idea of villas assembled inte well-
ventilated dwelling blocks condenses two of the architectural necessities
noted by Marinetii in Le Futurisme. But Le Corbusier differs from the
Futurists in maintaming (and, in the changed post-War circumstances, he
was probably right) that while the techniques, the mechanisms and the
social necessities for such an architecture existed already, the people were
not ready for it

The right state of mind does not exist
and were still devoted to

this sclidly built thing which sets out to defy time and decay, and which is an
expensive luxury by which wealth can be shown.
This, to him, was a decisive blockage to progress, which could not get
under way until established architectural prejudices had been eradicated
If we elaminate from our hearts and minds all dead concepts in regard to the
house, and look at the question from a critical and objective point of view, we
shall arrive at the House-machine (matsen outil), the mass-production house,
healthy {and morally sa too) and beautiful in the same way that the working tools
and instruments that accompany our existence are beautiful
But this eradication of prejudice would only facilitate the building of
houses that possessed the beauty of tools,’ and in this context this should
logically mean that they would be less than architecture. But this does not
seer to be what Le Corbusier intends to mean, and we find ourselves faced
with an ambiguity similar to that in an earlier chapter between the laws
of nature and the rules of art. This ambiguity is deepened in the closing
chapter, which was written as a concluding and unifying coda to the dispar-
ate pieces which make up the book. Its title is ‘Architecture ou Revolution’,
but since it deals almost entirely with the technical reform of dwellings it
ought, logically again, to have been called ‘Construction ou Révolution', and
‘In later editions of Vers une Architecture, apparently realising that he had left
a crucial hoje in his argument at this point, he added the words “Reautiful also with

al) the animation that the artist's sensibility can add to severe and pure functioning
BIEMments.

far from truly uniting the main themes, architectural and mechanical, of
the book it introduces an entirely new one, the social pressures resulting
from the quantitative and qualitative deficiencies of housing in France.
Since it is a plea for more housing it might, one supposes, be construed as
a plea for architecture in the low-level sense of more work for architects,
and it may have been se read in the Twenties when young architects were
work-starved. But its explicit theme is the inadequacy of housing as then
standing or as then conceived, for a mechanised soctety, with new needs,
and new psychological drives, such as that esprit de corps that could be
found in the factories, but had no counterpart in social life outside. The
solution demanded is

... an amelioration, of historical importance

in the construction, planning and equipment of houses, and the chapter
closes, and with it the book, on a fine rhetorical note of reforming zeal.
Disturbed by the reactions which play upon him from every quarter, the man
of today is conscious, on the one hand, of a new world which is forming itself
regularly, togically and clearly, which produces in a straightforward way things
which are useful and usabie, and on the other hand he finds himself to his sur-
prise, living in an old and hostile environment. .. .
‘There reigns a great disagreement between the modern state of mind, which is
an admonition to us, and the stifling accumulation of age-long detritus.
‘The problem is one of adaptation, in which the realities of our life are in question,
Society is filled with a viclent desire for something which it may obtain or may
not. Everything lies in that; everything depends on the effort made and the atten-
tion paid to these alarming symptoms,
Architecture or Revolution. '
Revolution can be avoided.
Taken out of context, or even kept within the context of this chapter alone,
this appears to be a statement of social protest purely, but put into the
context of the book as a whole, it appears to be a statement of protest
against the employment of the wrong style—the disaccord that is really
at stake is between two or more sets of geometrical forms, and this is
supgestively underlined by the last illustration, the briar pipe. This was an
object that had already been cited as an example of the natural style of the
times, and brought into the hours of repos something of that geometrical
order which Le Corbusier acclaimed as characteristic of the hours of work.
It was aiso a familiar and reassuring object, and therefore also under-
lines the tone of reassurance to architects that mins through the whole
book, Viewing the work as a whole, one sees that even if it has no argu-
ment, it has at least a motto-theme, which may be summarised as follows:
architecture js in disorder now, but its essential laws of Classical geometry
remain, Mechanisation does net threaten these faws but reinforces them,
and when architecture has recovered these Classical laws and made its
peace with machinery, it will be in a position to redress the wrongs of
society. In this Le Corbusier was probably well in accord with the mood
of the times as it existed, even if he did not quite accord with that mood as

advanced architects themselves understood it, for it should be noted that
whereas the original title Vers une Architecture, simply says “Towards an
Architecture’, and implies, from internal evidence in the book, an absolute
or essential architecture, which had always existed and had merely been
mislaid, the titles of the English and German translations are ‘Towards a
New Architecture’ and ‘Kommende Baukunst’ respectively, and put an
entirely different slant on the matter, though not one that is entirely
unsupported by the text. In any case, it was precisely this rediscovery of
the old in the new, this justification of the revolutionary by the familiar,
that ensured the book its enormous readership, and an influence, inevitably
superficial, beyond that of any other architectural werk published in this
century to date. It enabled men, regarding the author’s undoubtedly
revolutionary buildings, to find in them justifications for their most in-
grained prejudices—it is noticeable that its influence has been greatest
where the French Beaux-Arts tradition is strongest. Its great success,
however, has not only overwhelmed better-reasoned and more genuinely
revolutionary works by other authors, but has also reduced the attention
given to other, and better-reasoned books by Le Corbusier himself, which
are the subject of the next chapter.

18: Le Corbusier: town-planning and aesthetics

BY 1926, THE year when Le Corbusier committed to print his next impor-
tant theoretical statements, he had become something of an established
figure in the world of Paris architecture. The middle-of-the-road maga-
vine La Construction Moderne included him in a list of celebrities whose
views on the housing crists they canvassed; he had some half dozen
schemes completed or in construction, and even his personal appearance
was a subject of comment, for he endeavoured to present himself as an
homme-type of the age, in the dark clothes, bowler hat, pipe and bow tie of
an engineer, But what had established him, more than anything else, was
the Paviifon de Esprit Nouveau, erected with the powerful and necessary
backing of Charles de Monzie, Minister of Fine Arts, at the Exposition des
Arts Décoratrfs.

Though the exhibits designed by Kiesler and Melnikov were, in some
ways, more advanced aesthetically and structurally, this pavilien had the
advantage of completeness, it envisaged a whole way of domestic life down
to its minor details, The structure was, effectively and allowing for an
existing tree on the site, a full-scale mock-up of one unit of the Jrmeudle-
Villas, cormplete with its adjoined terrace, furnished with odjets-type and
Purist works of art. It created an entirely homogeneous visual setting, a
creation of a single mind, so that one is tempted to compare it to those
interiors completely designed by such masters of the previous generation
as van de Velde or Mackintosh, but there is an extremely important dif-
ference, Only the structure is a work of design by the mind that created
the environment, the rest was claimed to be a work of selection almost
in the Duchamp manner from standard products, odjezs-type, already on
the market, and the homogeneity of the whole came largely from the
adaptation of the structure to an aesthetic derived from certain classes of
abjets-type, and the rejection of any standard products that did not answer
this aesthetic. Although certain distortions of intention appear in this
process, and some objects had to be diverted from their original functions,
e.g. laboratory vessels as flower-vases, the resulting interior owed much of
its impact to the directness with which mass-produced equipment, such

as Thonet and Maple chairs, could fulfil aesthetic functions that were sup-
posed, even in progressive circles, to require the services of cabinet makers.
Even the paintings on the walls were of the type then supposed to be
capable of mass-reproduction in the sense intended by Albert Gleizes,
and annexed to this appartement-iype was a species of rotunda housing
large-scale dioramas of Le Corbusier's two town-planning schemes of the
period, Thus, the pavilion, taken as a whole, gave visual form to all the
main themes of the articles on design that had appeared in L'Esprit
Nouveau (which ceased publication at the time of the exhibition) and were
at different times reprinted in book form: painting: La Peinture Moderne;
architecture: Vers une Architecture, product design: L'’Art Décoratif
@’ Aujourd hui, a polemical work of only local interest, and town-planning,
Urbanisme, which is among his best worked-out books of the period,
but not among the most influential.

It opens with an <Avertissement full of aphorisms and slogans whose
import is familiar from Vers une Architecture

A town is a tool,

Towns no longer fulfil this function. They are ineffectual, they use up our

bodies, they thwart our souls,
or apain

A cityl

It is the grip of man on nature.
and yet again

Geometry is the means, created by ourselves, whereby we perceive the external

world and express the world within us.
but if these given grounds are familiar, the procedure of the argument is
not. ‘The first chapter opens by picking upon what seems at first to be only
a detailcon sideration in town planning, straight roads versus curved. But
this is the fundamental consideration for Le Corbusier. In attacking Cam-
illo Sitte he is attacking what he considers to be a philosophy of disorder
and mere aesthetics; serpentine roads he dubs Le Chemin des Anes, straight
roads Le Chemin des Hommes, apparently because he 1s under the impres-
sion that to travel in straight lines is to reveal the ability to reason and a
sense of purpose peculiar to homo sapiens

L’homme marche droit parcequ’il a un but

a statement which is equally true, given a reasonably flat surface, of
donkeys that have an end in view. All he is doing, in fact, is restating his
familiar aesthetic prejudices in a new rhetorical form, but this particular
preference gives a basic inclination to the whole argument of the book—
before all else, the Ville-outil, the ville-type, will be rectilinear. Even before
the beginning of this chapter, at the end of the Avertissement, he had re-
produced one of those nemonic charts of regular geometrical forms that
used to appear in the back cover of artthmetic exercise books (and not only

in France} and the Débat Générai of the seven opening chapters rarely
strays outside the terms of reference laid down by this chart. Right angles
and the Phileban solids are praised, and a curious diagram underlines the
value he attaches to these forms. It balances, on one side ‘classicisme’,
epitomised by triangle, square, sphere, ete. against “‘barbarisme’, charac-
terised by verticals, zigzags and, it should be noted, a sculpture by Reb
van tHoff and a diagram of a Gothic chevet, with a caption that says,
inter alia
One is a symbol of perfection, the other of effort only. All the same, one is of
amore elevated order than the other, for one is complete and the other is only
an attempt.
A matching diagram, over the page, shows a rising line of Culture crossing
a descending line of Barbarism at 1453 (Prise de Constantinople) with the
facade of Noire Dame on one side of the mtersection, and the Perrault
front of the Louvre on the other—an overwhelmingly clear statement of
his Classicist preferences, that introduces a Définition du Sentiment
Moderne. This begins with what is effectively a second caption to the
diagram described above
Our moder culture, acquired by the West, has its roots set deep in the invasions
which extinguished antique culture. After the check of ap roce it began to build
itself again slowly through another ten centuries. With a primitive but admirably
ingenious equipment invented in the Middle Ages it inscribed certain points of
great splendour in the eighteenth century, ,., Where the eighteenth century
defined the fundamenta! principles of reason, the nineteenth century, by a
magnificent effort, gave itself up to analysis and experiment, and created an
equipment which was estirely new, formidable, revolutionary and destined ta
revolutionise society... .
So far (as so often with Le Corbusier} compressed Choisy, and he makes
no attempt to prove that his Sentiment Moderne arises from all this in any
consequential manner, but merely asserts that it can now be felt.

We are the heirs of that effort, we are aware of our modern feeling and we know
that an era of creation is about to commence. . . .

This modern sentiment is 2 spirit of geometry, a spirit of construction and
synthesis. Exactitude and order are its easential condition, .. . ‘This ta the passion
of the age. With what astonishment do we regard the disordered and spasmodic
impulses of Romanticism! A period when the soul was thrown back on itself in
such an effort of analysis that it was as though a volcano were in eruption. No
longer do we get these eruptions of overcharged personality. The amplitude of
our means impels us toward the general, and to an appreciation of the simple
fact. In piace of individualism and its fevered products, we prefer the common-
place, the everyday, the rule to the exception. The everyday, the rule, the com-
mon rule seem to us now the strategic base for the journey towards progress
and the beautiful. A general beauty draws us in, and the heroically beautiful
seems merely theatrical. We prefer Bach to Wagner... .

This breaks no new ground, but tf sets out his justifications of the typical,
of the generalised situation-type in a more concise form than can be found
elsewhere, and it is worth noting that while he sets up Bach, the Pantheon,
Babylonian and Roman planning and Je Rot Soleil, as objects of admiration

and insists that

We love the solution, and we are uneasy at the sight of failures, however grandiose
or dramatic
he nevertheless follows this with an almost Futurist appreciation of the
grandiose drama of the emergent tendencies, still lacking solution, of the
times
Throughout the world we see the array of mighty powers, both in the industrial
and the social spheres; we see, emerging from chaas, ordered and logical aspira-
tions, and we feei that they are in harmony with the means of realisation at our
disposal, New forms come to birth; the world adopts a new attitude. The old
prejudices cramble and crack and totter....An indescribable quiver is passing
through everything; it is putting the old machine out of gear, it is the motive
force and aim of the age.
The Futurist tone of this passage is the more remarkable in that the very
next chapter is a flat refutation of the Futurist theory of caducitd, of the
idea that works of art should be perishable. Le Corbusier distinguishes,
along familiar lines, works of art from works of technology, and insists
that only the latter are perishable, in a most remarkable chapter, under the
heading of Perennité. He opens by rephrasing his earlier praise of engineers
in such a way that they are demoted from the status of noble savages to
that of a species of perfected, but sub-human Rationalists

The mdustrial achievements of our own age which impress us so profoundly
today are created by placid and modest men, whese thoughts are Jemited and
direct, engineers who do their additions on squared paper... yet these men can
bring those of us who have something of the poet in us to the very extreme of
enthusiasm and emotion,

Against the products of reason, which he declares to be expendable and

fallible, he sets the products of passion, which he claims are as permanent
as human nature is permanent

... teason ig an open account stretching to infinity in which each successive
stage is registered. ... Human passion, since man wes man, hag been constant...
the gauge by which we can measure the permanence of human creations,

The activity of the mind continues unendingly, in an ascending curve; it
creates its implements: and this we call progress. The components of passion
remain constant, coming between two limits which the ages have not altered.

On this basis, he can do two things: (a) he can advance a criticismn of the
beauty of machinery that reverses the Futurist position, and (6) he can
call in question the aesthetic status of some of the most admired works of
civil engineering, On the first count, he opposes the Futurist position that
machines are beautiful in so far as they are not the products of ‘art’ by
proposing that the intervention of ‘passion’ is vital

Let us attempt to formulate the standards of mechanical beauty. If one could

admit that mechanical beauty was a matter of pure reason, the question would

be settled out of hand: mechanical creation could have no permanent aesthetic

value. Each piece of mechanism would be more beautiful than what had pre-
ceded jt and would inevitably be surpassed by its succeasors. And so we should


.

get an ephemeral beauty, soan out of date and despised. But in practice things
do not happen a0; man’s sensibilities intervene even in the midst of the most
rigorous calculation . . . intervention of an individual taste, sensibility and
passion.
yet in spite of this he inconsistently maintains that the nature of machinery
remains perishable even in conception
The foaming locomotive, the rearing steed that evoked the hasty lyricism of
Huysrnans, 18 rusting iron on the scrap-heap. The cars of the next Salon re-

quire that Citroen write off the model that has been ail the rage. But the Roman
aqueduct endures... .

This brings him to his second count.

The Roman squeduct endures, the Caliseurn is piously conserved, the Pont du
Gard lives on. But will the emotion produced in us by Eiffel’s Pont de Garabit
endure?
The work of Eiffel has often been taken as a touchstone of Modernity,
and it is maintained that only true ‘Moderns’ can admire it. Le Corbusier’s
attitude to the Eiffel Tower is as hesitant as to the Pont de Garabit, and
in a caption to a photograph of the Tower (albeit titled Hommage 4 Eiffel)
he postpones judgement on it to the Greek Kalends, more or less
. when the city is built on the same grand scale, then we shall be in a position
to go into the question of the permanence of the Eiffel Tower.
But in captioning the Pont du Gard he relapses without hesitation into the
rhetoric of the Ecole

Le Pont du Gard. Romain, Classé au Panthéon de Ia gloire.

The hesitant attitude toward the work of so great an engineer, whose
reputation has proven highly durable, may be due, among other things, to
a distrust of the non-Phileban forms of Eiffel’s work—a distrust that was
fairly general among Parisian aestheticians when confronted with splay-
legged lattice structures of any kind, as in this comment, by a caption-
writer (who elsewhere revealed himself a mechanical ignoramus) in
Cahiers d@’ Art, on a German coaling gantry.
The work of the engineer, pure in its origins, begins gradually to be adulterated
by aesthetic pursuits. The crane which is seen on this page is soaked in romantic
Expressionism. [t would be a great pity if engineers refused to recognise that
their work is not meant to communicate emotions, but with a view te rigorously
defined utilisation. Emotion comes by super-addition when the work exactly
fulfils the function for which it is destined*
While it is doubtful if Le Corbusier would subscribe to the old-fashioned
type of Functionalism revealed in the last sentence of this quotation, any
more than he would pass so ill-informed a judgement on what appears to
be an exemplary piece of engineering design, it is interesting to record
‘Unsigned caption in Cakters d'Art (Paris, 1926, No. 5, p. 114). 'Thia writer’s
qualifications to pass judgement on works of engineering may be gauged by his
further statement, lower down the same page, that turbine ships need no funnels.

that he did share the caption-writer’s suspicion of engineers who had
aesthetic ideas ‘above their stations’.
When a man's passion for creation has taken form, his work will endure through
© ages.
But this is 2 dangerous judgement, for shall we see engineers trying to turn them-
selves into men of aesthetic sensibility? That would be a real danger... . An
engineer should stay fixed, and remain a calculator, for his particular justifica-
tien is to remain within the confinea of pure reason,
Works of engineering are not to be ranked with works of art, lacking the
sanction of time, nor engineers with artists, lacking the sanction of passion
—and since the city was intended to last, it too must be a work of passion
But it is the city’s business to make itself perrmanent, and this depends on con-
siderations other than those cf calculation. And it is only Architecture which
ean give all the things that go beyond calculation.
Between this taking up of position on the grounds of geometry and peren-
niality, and the actual excursions into town planning that make up the second
half of Urbantsme, there are interposed a series of disorderly chapters
(disorderly in sequence rather than argument) from which, however, the
following important points can be extracted, Firstly, the concept of standard-
isation is rephrased in such a way that it does not restrict the ‘passion’ of
the town planner, by taking over (with acknowledgements) an idea from the
Abbé Laugier
t. Chaos, disorder and a wild variety in the general layout (that is, a composi-

tion rich in contrapuntal elements like a fugue or a symphony).
2, Uniformity in detail (that is, reticence, decency, ‘alignment’ of details).

which is exemplified later by reference to /es velles dites ‘d'art’

The basis of all this is the existence of 2 standard. So in Rome, in Venice; ail
dwelling-houses are stuecoed; in Siena they are of brick; the windows are to one
scale, the roofs to the same pitch and covered with the same tiles; the colour is
uniform.

Secondly:
H faut planter des arbres!

an idea which also seers to derive from his experience of cities of art (he
mentions Turkey in particular} as well as a day-to-day familiarity with
Haussmann’s town planning. Thirdly; two chapters and a supplement of
newspaper cuttings reproduit tel, are devoted to an exposition of the
increasingly critical condition of vehicular circulation in the great cities
of the world, This exposition still carries weight, not only because the crisis
is now general to all cities, but also because his means of presentation,
ranging from statistical curves to comic drawings, give both quantitative
and personal force to his argument, Fourthly; the means to da something
to ameliorate this condition, and other ills of great cities. Here, following
Futurist precept again, he corrects the proposition of Choisy, only twenty-
five years earlier, that the present state of outillage in building was sub-

= fa

ee

stantially that of the Gothic or even prehistoric periods, He contrasts the
navvying equipment used as recently as in Haussmann’s public works in
Paris, with the fully mechanised system of mixers, conveyors and tel-
pherage employed in pouring the concrete of the Barrage de Barberine, in
the Alps, but he also underlines the inadequate use made of current
techniques by a further contrast, between the 3000 hand-made kilometres
of the Wall of China and the 140 machine-cut kilometres of the Paris
Métro, on which work was still proceeding in the Twenties.

This, appropriately, concludes the Débat Général, and brings him to the
second part of the book, in which the various ideas he has brought forward
are applied to actual town-planning schemes, The manner in which he
approaches the problem is entirely characteristic. In direct contrast to
Sant’ Elia, whose town-planning ideas grew out of a specific topographical
location, Milan Central Station, or te Tony Garnier, whose Cité Indus-
trielle stood on a site which, though ideal for his purposes, had the charac-
teristics and limitations of natural topography, Le Corbusier starts on a
blank sheet of paper, and rejects even imaginary accidents of site.

Proceeding in the manner of an investigator in his laboratory, I have avoided aii

special cases, and all that may be accidental, and F have assumed an ideal site

to begin with.

Although this seems to imply a curious view of scientific method, the ap-
proach is not an unexpected one. He elaborates first 2 solution-type, in the
abstract, its real life application can wait. This particular systéme préconise
was first developed in 1921-2, and shown at the Salon d’Automue of the
latter year, under the tithe Une Ville Contemporaine pour 3 Millions
ad’ Haditants. It will be noted that he called it a contemporary city, and was
offended when it was termed a city of the future, insisting that it could be,
and ought te be, built at onze.

Upen the unrestricted plane of his ideal site, the planning makes a
pattern of unmistakable Beaux-Arts extraction, with major and minor
axes, star intersections of orthogonal and diagonal roads, and the rest of
the apparaius, As in Garnier’s Cité, industry is dismissed to the outskirts

In a decent house the servants’ stairs do not po through the drawing-room—

even if the maid is charming {or if the little boats delight the loiterer leaning

on the bridge),
but in contradistinction to Garnier, the circulation-planning, however
diagrammatic, is generous and appears free from bottle-necks. At points
of maximum traffic-pressure, the means of achieving adequate circulation
surface are Sant’ Elian (if they do not go back beyond him to Tony
Moilin) and at the centre of the city, there are no fewer than seven super-
imposed levels. Of these, the uppermost is an aircraft landing-deck, thus
repeating a suicidal device from Sant’Elia, of asking aircraft to land be-
tween ranks of tall buildings, and the Sant’Elian source of this particular
device seems underlined by the fact that the main central station is under-

neath. The contrast between the Beaux-Arts pattern of the plan as a
whole and the Futurist quality of the section is very striking, and is
heightened by the Futurist tone in which Le Corbusier discusses the sky-
scraper office-blacks that cluster so dangerously close around the landing
deck

And actually these skyscrapers wil] contain the city’s brains, the brains of the
whole nation. They stand for all the careful working-our and organisation on
which the general activity ia based, Everything is concentrated in them: appat-
atus for abolishing time and space, telephones, cabies and wireless; the banks,
business affairs and the control of industry; finance, commerce, spectalisation.
The station is in the midst of the skyscrapers, the tubes run below them and the
tracks for fast traffic are at their base.
The skyscrapers themselves are unique in his work, and unlike any of the
subsequent designs for tall slabs and towers that have come from his hand.
To judge from the observations he passed on them when they first appeared
in Vers une Architecture, they were originally worked up fram ideas of
Auguste Perret’s, but the master’s own version, when it finally appeared,
had Classical detailing, and bridges spanning from tower to tower several
stories up—and was rejected by Le Corbusier as Futurtsme bien danger eux!
‘The form which he himself gives to these towers is a cross in plan, with
each arm massively pleated, so that many rooms have three exterior
walls, and these walls are entirely glazed, He dates the first sketches for this
project as early as 1920, so that they are contemporary, within a few months,
to Mies van der Rohe's earliest Friedrichstrasse project, which also has
walls of glass, prismatically folded. No necessary connection between the
two projects need be postulated, beyond a common source in German ideas
of the pre-War period, particularly since Le Corbusier had gone out of his
way to denounce, in 1921, the strong vertical emphasis that such a fagade
would give, as an error peculiar to German architecture.

Ome simple fact condemns the Jot; in a building one lives floor by foor (on vit

par étage) horizontally not vertically. The German palaces are just lift cages... .

The Louvre and Bon Marché shops are in horizontals and they are nght and the

German architects are wrong.?
The other main class of accommodation envisaged for the Ville Contem-
poraine, seems to consist entirely of middle-class housing, of the [mmeubles-
villas type, grouped either in hoHow squares as they had appeared in Vers
une Architecture, or 4 redents, that is, in setbacks that advance and retreat
symometrically on either side of the street, a device that does much to
account for the elegant abstract pattern of the overall plan.

Whatever reservations one may entertain about the use of Beaux-Arts
formulae and other aesthetic predeterminations, Une Ville Contemporaine

*In L'Esprit Nouveau (1921, No. 9); the buildings he had in mind were, for
instance, Messel’s Wertheim store and similar neo=Gothic structures, end, on
another count, the neo-Claasical work of Behrena, which he had come to hate as

foilitanstic Dropeganda. particularly the Embassy in Petrograd.


remains a remarkable achievement and a measure of Le Corbusier's
powers. Since it was exhibited in a definitive form as early as 1922, it was
only four years later than the definitive publication of Garnier’s Cité,
which did not appear until 1918, but in spirit a whole generation has grown
up between the two, and it has clear advantages of boldness and adequacy
over Garnier’s project. Over Sant’ Elia’s design it has an equally clear
advantage of completeness—it is a whole city, not a series of tactical
exercises in solving isolated problems, and over contemporary German
projects, such as the Rococo elaborations of Camillo Sitte worked out by
Bruno Taut under the influence of Finsterlin, it has clear advantages of
order, comprehensibility and feasibility.

In the Pavillon de f Esprit Nouveau, Le Corbusier exhibited this scheme
in one diorama, and, facing it, another diorama in which he attempted to
apply the systéme préconise to an actual city, as the Plan Votsin de Paris.
At once its weaknesses begin to appear—the destination of the two great
motor roads that form the axe primaire and the axe secondaire of the plan is
never resolved and they disappear off the map, north, south, east and west.
Symmetry, as such, has to be compromised—the towers stand mostly along
the axe secondaire, northwards from Chatelet, the Jmmeubles-cillas mostly
along the axe primaire, well to the west, north of the Tuileries and
the Champs Elysées, and separated from the business towers by
the central station, which has no buildings of any importance on top
of it.

It was immediately noted, when the Plan Voisin was exhibited in 1925,
that it would involve the demolition of most of historical Paris north of the
Seine, since it occupies a sector extending from the Place de la Republique
to points west of the Gare St Lazare, and extending as far north as the Gare
de l'Est. Within this pair of overlapping rectangles a few recognised
monuments were to be preserved, not always on their original sites, though
the Place Vendéme, which Le Corbusier greatly admired, was to be Jeft
iatact and in place. He was clearly conscious of the shocking effect that
such a project was likely to have, even im progressive circles, and he set
out to block two lines of protest in advance, one, by pointing out that the
small site-area and large capacity of high-rise developments would make
it possible to accommodate many without dispossessing more than a few
by demolitions, and another by some ingenious guess-work about the
finance involved. However, these financial proposals involved the wel-
coming of foreign, even German, capital investment m the centre of Paris,
and he only succeeded in further offending the kind of patriotic Tradition-
alists whom the whole project was most likely to alarm,3

Yet he himself clearly felt that he stood firmly in a tradition that had

* Gauthier’a biography af Le Corbusier gives a goad account of the pelemical
campaigns launched against hum by the factions of Mauclair, Umbdenstock and

native roots in Paris, both intellectually and historically, The concluding
words of the text of Urbanisme are against revolution for its own sake
Things are not revolutionised by making revolutions. The real revolution les
in the solution of existing problems.
and they are faced by a final illustration: an engraving of Louis XIV
commmanding the construction of the Invalides, with the caption
Homage to a great town-planner—This despot conceived great projects and
realised them, Over all the country his noble werks still fill us with admiration,
He was capable of saying, ‘We wish it’, or ‘Such is our pleasure’,
to which he adds parenthetically, as if he feared to alarm progressive senti-
ment

{ceci n'est pas une déciaration de ‘Action Frangaise’.)

The reader, reflecting on these two first books of Le Corbusier, cannot
fail to note how little they contain in the way of positive statements about
the detail aesthetics of architecture, about the way that a building should
look. The Matson Citrohan, its derivatives and multiples, are justified only
in terms of function and construction, in spite of all that was said about
Functionalism being less than architecture; the towers of the Ville Con-
femporaine were little more than diagrams, with whose aesthetics he waa
professedly out of sympathy. It seems likely that it was not until about the
year 1925 that he had any settled aesthetic opinions on the subject, for his
work of the early Twenties is variable and manifestly tentative. The Villa
at Vaucresson, commissioned by a client who had been impressed by the
Citrohan project, shows him in two minds about symmetry, and has one
asymmetrical fagade and one conventional one, though without any really
axial qualities in the internal planning; the Ozenfant House had a saw-
toothed roof, such as he was never to repeat again, the LaRoche-Jeanneret
houses had a sprawling, picturesque plan, such as he also never repeated,
and was, in fact, a symmetrical project with one limb amputated. All these
works contain good, or even brilliant, parts, but none has the ease or
assurance of the house at Chaux-de-Fonds. That quality begins to be re-
covered in his works of 1925-6 and may be exemplified by the dormitory
wing of the Palais du Peuple, near the Gobclins manufactory, and the
Maison Cook, in Boulogne-sur-Seine,

The first initiates a series of hostel-type structures that he put up in the
Twenties and Thirties, a plain rectangular block of four identical dormi-
tory floors, served by a connecting stair at one end, the whole raised on
piletis above a diminutive garden little larger in area than the plan of the
block itself. The roof is flat and without visible excrescences, though it was
originally intended to sport a pergola at the garden end, commanding a
view over the Parc des Gobelins. Since the staircase is partly buried in the
adjoining Padais (sic: a converted warehouse) al] that one sees is the pure
elevated rectangle of the dormitory, with extremely elegant fenestration,

44

repeated identically frorn floor to floor, drawn on the unmodulated
‘blane de chaux’ of the flat facades.

The Maison Cock is a more complex affair, though justifiably described
by the architect himself as "La wraie maison cubigue’.* Both in plan and
on its main elevation, it consists of compositions within an almost exact
square. Although the main elevation has an open terrace to one side of the
highest floor, a concrete ‘sun-shade’ is carried across in front of this to
maintain the rectangular format, and although the main salon, also at this
level, is of double height, this fact is not demonstrated on the street side,
which emphasises, rather, that ‘on wit par étage’. The block is on pilotia
again, leaving an almost unobstructed ground floor from party-wall to
party-wall, and on the two main floors there are fenéires en longueur, also
spanning from wall to wall, the central structural column being set back
behind them to give an uninterrupted run of glass, On plan, this mode of
composing within 2 predetermined rectangular format is even more striking
because of the use of curved forms, a usage that also appears in the Guiette
house at Antwerp (designed in the same year) and the large and compli-
cated villa at Garches for Charles de Monzie, which must have been put in
hand soon after this, and appears to draw heavily on the Maison Cook as a
prototype. Not only is the mode of composing with rectangular and curved
elements within a rectangular field of predetermined dimensions very
similar to the mode of composing his paintings, but many of the curved
shapes, whatever their functional justification, appear to dertve from the
forms of the objets-type in the pictures as well.

This group of buildings and projects designed by him around this time
has a very strongly characterised style of plain square silhouettes, white
rendered walls with the absolute minimum of relief (balanced by a tendency
to punch large holes right through them into the interior), compact rect-
angular plans featuring the use of curved walls and frée-standing cohimns,
long horizontal strips of window, flat roofs, and pilotis (or a clearly dif-
ferentiated basement floor) to lift the main block clear of the ground.
In his well-known writings, the justifications of these various usages appear
only after the event—sometimes long after it—but there is a document of
the exact period, that has largely escaped attention, yet provides a fairly
extended explanation of his intentions in the employment of this particular
style.

Since it appeared in a learned publication—a special issue of the Feurnal
de Psychologie Normale et Pathologique devoted to the arts and aesthetics—
it is free both of the rhetorical tone of persuasion used in L’ Esprit
Nouveau, and also of the polemical pressures of monthly journalism. 'The
consequence is an essay {partly worked up from a lecture given earlier at
the Sorbonne) that differs in method from his other writing of the period

“It ia not quite a strict cube, since the width is a little leas than the other two

and differs also in the frankness with which it is prepared to discuss purely
aesthetic considerations. It opens with a display of juggling with dictionary
definitions of art, architecture, and so forth, from which he emerges with
two definitions-by-diflerentiation of the art of architecture. Firstly by
differentiation of two bodies of architects, whose aims are

For the first, to introduce into architecture the concept of ornament, and the

presence of fixed rules, settled methods, settled procedures. For the second, the
rules are fo be fixed, the methods fo be settled, the procedures te be discovered,

and secondly by differentiating two extremes of procedure

‘There are, in the flux of ideas that comprise these definitions, the two poles of

architecture, which are: to construct buildings (realm of technique}; and to

embellish them and make them glorious, delightful, etc. (realm of sentiment).
The first distinction is clearly meant to separate the academics from the
progressives, the second to continue the distinction between technology
and aesthetics. However, having repeated his determination to separate
them, he also insists on the necessity of their simultaneous presence

Technicité et sentiment, synchronisme insécable

but throughout this argument, he frequently insists on the primacy of
techniques.
I have said that the technical consideration comes first before everything and
is its condition, that it carries within it unavoidable plastic consequences, and
that it leads sometimes to radical aesthetic transformations
‘This is clearly Choisyesque and echoes of Choisy are fairly frequent in the
early pages, notably a definition of the nature of walling in reinforced con-
crete construction that repeats both the meaning and te seme extent the
actual words of Choisy’s definition of the nature of walling in Gothic.

What was once a load-bearing organ, has become a simple infilling

But, as elsewhere, Choisy’s limitations are transcended by Le Corbusier's
Futurist sense of the recent mechanical revolution, which he now recog-
nises to have disturbed sentiment as well as technology
It makes him travel twenty, fifty times as fast as before, makes him produce a
hundred times as much as before, offera him sights and interesta a thousand
times as varied as before. At that rate we can safely say that the age is new, and
the individual] out of orbit.
That which constituted the very basis of mind, the exact site of permanent things
that gave an eternal-seeming basis to the endeavours of the mind and man's way
of life—that site is upset, ne longer precise nor immediate.
From this he deduces, in particular, the need to evolve new plans to suit
new needs
Now, the art of constructing buildings is different, different methods on different
Plans. We must start again from Zero,
an apparent echo of Sant’Elia (si ricomtincia da capo) that is partly sus-
tained in the ensuing observation


... for nothing more existe of the ancient values: a wall no longer needs to carry
weight, a house has every interest In being off the ground {on pilotis} and nat
directly on the earth; a house no longer needs « pitched roof, can be made in a
factory.
Here, it will be observed, he is, almost for the first time, discussing the
shape and construction of a house, frame-built, flat-roofed, on pilotis. But
against these new possibilities he sets the permanence of human reactions
Past, present, future, it is plainly the reactions of the same man to the aame
agents of stimulation . . . and our sensations are types, related to forrns, lines and
colours.
Here again we seem to have an echo of Charles Blanc's belief that various
forms have a regular relation with human responses, but in the case of Le
Corbusier this idea had probably been reinforced by the ‘research’ of
Charles Henry, the academic aesthetician whose findings had been pub-
lished extensively in L’Esprit Nouveau. In any case, we are faced once
again, as so often in his early writings, with an ambiguity—in this case
amounting to a contradiction, between two Lines of thought, between two
concepts of order, between the supposedly progressive and changeable
nature of technology and the supposedly eternal and immutable nature of
aesthetics, But this time he recognises the dichotomy, and also recognises
that something must be done about it.
Insofar as the house has repudiated en Sloe the traditional baggage of forms,
lines and colours, we too find ourselves here forced to start again from zero, and
to make a fresh choice in conformity with that sense of harmony that, at all
times, balances the equation of reason and passion,
That is to say, a technological revolution has devalued the oid repertoire
of architectural forms, so we must now select a new set of forms, still
answerable to the existing mules of aesthetics, Nothing could be farther
from the Functionalist-determinist attitude with which Le Corbusier has
been so often credited—what is revealed here, and confirmed by his other
writings passim, is an attitude in which aesthetics, not function, are both
determined and determining.

At this point, his argument reaches a dead stop, his first main point has
been made, and he takes off again on an entirely different and unexpected
tack, He now sets out in tabular form five Bléments Objectifs de Discussion
sur le Phénoméne Architecturale

1. Architecture: to construct a shelter

2, Shelter: to put a covering over walls

3. Covering: to span an opening and leave clear space

4. Light the shelter: te make windows

5. Window: to span an opening
and, as is immediately obvious, this list puts very close limits on the way
in which architecture can be discussed. It never allows architecture out of
the realm of technicité; it postulates the existence of walls, roofs and win-
dows; and it defines windows in a tendentious manner, in order to be

certain of arriving at the form of window to which the author was already
committed—ia fenétre en longueur. Elements (3) and (5) define a covering
and a window in identical terms, as the spanning of an opening, and not
only does this imply that these two spans ought to be the same, i.e,
effected by the same structural member, but that changes in the manner of
spanning openings should bring with them changes in the form of win-
dows. Before the existence of reinforced concrete, windows
.. could not usefully be widened, because that would have necessitated fat
vaults that were too long and difficult to build; or arches that would have pushed
the cetlings too high. But sow a house can be built of reinforced concrete
uprights... leaving total voids between them. ... What good is it, I ask, to fill this
space up again, when it has been given me empty? What use is a window, if not to
light the walls? [te was thus that I came to admit that a fenétre en longueur, equal in
size toa window en fauteur is superior to it, since it permits the illumination
of the flanking walls.
There follows, after this, the discussion of walls as remplissage in a concrete
frame, which is, in fact, a justification of his usages in fenestration, since
there the distinction between frame and fill can be seen, whereas his solid
walling tends to use an overall rendering to obliterate this distinction.
Next comes a justification of flat roofs on functional grounds, supported
by a lengthy piece of autobiography about the disastrous behaviour of the
pitched reof on his early cinema at Chaux-de-Fonds, where the snow melted
from internal heating on the high parts of the roof, and the water ran
down until it encountered the unthawed snow at the eaves plate, where-
upon it ran back down the inside of the walls, This he claims, is avoided on
a flat roof laid to fall toward the warmed centre, as in the villa at Chaux, and

If this is the only solution to extreme cases, we can be sure it is the solution-

type for al] cases.

—a most remarkable declaration from one who had earlier refused to argue
from de cas d’ espéce.

In any case, the main argument in favour of flat roofs is aesthetic, and is
developed in the latter part of the essay, which is largely a transcript of
his lecture at the Sorbonne.

What I wish to show, is that there is an established hierarchy of different states

of minds, and that certain of them are, perhaps, superior to others. This, at all

events, I allaw myself to affirm since it is for me a certainty: mind manifests
itself through geometry. From this 1 deduce that when geometry is all-power-
ful, mind has made progress over preceding periods of barbarism .. . arrived at

® period of intellectual clarity such as the Renaissance, it arrives also at the all-
powerful horizontal, the horizontal that closes the composition at its crown.

or, put more bluntly, a parapet concealed the pitched roof behind.

Now, we dispose today of the means to pursue this magnificent ascent towards
geametry, thanks to the invention of reinforced concrete, which offers us the
most pure tnechanism for orthogonal composition.
and the employment of such pure mechanisms carries within it, he asserta,
perfection,

awe oe

But the perfections of geometry can be carried further: tracds régu-
iateurs can be used to give eternally valid aesthetic order to the technically
valid openings in the wall that are dictated by fe plan nouveau, and it is
worth noting that this particular argument is argued back from a pre-
determined rectangular block to the final disposition of the functional
openings

. first the general cube of the building affects you fundamentally and defini-
tively . - + you pierce a window, open a doorway; immediately, relationships
arise between the spaces so defined, ... It remains only to polish your labours
by introducing the most perfect unity, ruling the work and regulating the
various clernents: trace: réguiateurs take aver.

The accompanying sketches confirm the method, which could equally
have been deduced from the buildings of the period: a given, unmodulated
cube is pierced by openings that are then pulled into their final positions
by a simple system of diagonals. Since the essay was published Le Corbusier
has shown drawings of the actual #racés used on a number of the buildings
of the late Twenties, all depending on the creation of an harmonious pattern
within the limits of a given rectangular fagade. The simplicity of the
method, usually deriving from a single diagonal and lines parallel or
normal to it, was apparently programmatic, for at this point in the argu-
ment Ie Corbusier turns aside to upbraid Berlage (not named but clearly
implied)* for his close-spaced grids of Quadratur en Triangulatur, of which
he says

That is no longer a tracé régulateur, but the weave of a canvas.

Simplicity is also the justification advanced for another usage, which had
at that time some significance as a slogan against the Ecole des Beaux-Arts,
the suppression of cornices, but simplicity is not to be pursued as an end
in itself
It would be desolating to find ourselves capsized into a fashion for simplicity. ...
If it is simplicity derived from preat complexity and richness, all is well; but if it
is only poverty that is expressed .. . nothing is gained, no propress made.
and simplicity of this complex and rich order can only arise from mental
discipline and, particularly, the discipline of mathematics,
.. out that simplicity demands, on the contrary, great constructional exactitude,
absolute precision of intention and reasoning; above all it demands the contri-
butions of proportion, of mathematical relationships; it atms to provoke that en-
joyment of mathematical order that is one of the most lawful aspirations of the
modern frame of mind,
Licite, the lawful aspirations of the modern mind—this is an extraordinary
note on which to end a paper by one so widely regarded as a transgressor
of laws, as the arch-revolutionary of twentieth-century architecture. But

* He describes ‘un confrére d’ Amsterdam, homme de haute valeur, ayant der-

miére lui une carri¢re glorieuse de précurseur', and clinches the identification by
sore thumb-nail versions of diagrams from the Grundiacen.

the fact remains that the real revolution lay in his completed buildings,
and the main interest of this paper lies in the way in which it does, fairly
and completely, describe most of the outstanding characteristics of those
buildings, On the technical side, they were to be frame-built, walled in
light materials, largely glazed, flat-roofed, raised on stilts; on the aesthetic
side they were to be simple and cubic, topped by a horizontal line and without
a cornice, with the openings in the wails distributed according to simple
geometrical recipes. Only two indirect connections between these two sets
of postulates can be observed, however: the identical definition of window
and covering, which requires, in frame construction, a particular kind of
window opening, and thus, to some extent, a particular kind of facade
composition; and the primacy accorded to the plan, which cannot, one
would think, be divorced entirely from either the structural frame or the
fenestration and thus ought to provide a link between technique and
aesthetics. And yet Le Corbusier’s two great country houses of the end
of the Twenties, at Garches and at Poissy, both make nonsense of this
supposition by employing what he later termed ‘le plan libre’. At Garches,
wall to wall fenestration runs across the whole of the front and two thirds
of the rear facade, without any apparent respect for the daylighting needs
of the rooms behind, while at the Villa Savoye at Poissy a standard band of
fenestration runs right round the main floor of the house, and the only
regard it pays to what is behind it is to remain unglazed where it gives on
to open courtyard and not on to closed room-space. In beth houses the
frame is an absolute three-dimensional grid which exists independently
of the planning of the various floors—not only do stray columns pass
through some rooms in seemingly awkward places, but in some instances
walls that could comfortably have filled-in the spaces from column to
column, have apparently been deliberately joggied out of Line to leave the
structure in clear distinction from the partitioning,

But this device appears to reveal a fundamental streak in his psychological
make-up. The difference between frame and wali must be made manifest at
all costs, even at the cost of common-sense logic, just as in his writings it
is clearly more important for him to make his ideas manifest than it is to
make them logical. But in this, there is no doubt that he succeeded, more
than any other architectural theorist of the time. His illogicalities have
always been common knowledge, but his ideas have been accepted in spite
of that—or more likely, because of that. He has put into circulation a body
of formal devices and emotional attitudes that are so intricately entangled in
his own mind, and have become so much a part of the common currency
of the Modern Movement, that it is rarely observed how little necessary
connection they have with one another. But it is worth noting here that the
most persuasive of his writings, and the most persuasive of his formal
usages, come from epochs almost 2 decade apart. The formal usages were
given currency mostly by buildings completed between 1930 and 1933 and


the ideas came almost exclusively from Vers une Architecture, of 1923. The
same decade encompassed, near enough, the rise and fall of the International
Style in Germany, a development in which the synchronisation of theory
and practice wags never seriously in doubt, and therefore presents a very
different picture to the historian.

Section five

BERLIN, THE BAUHAUS, THE VICTORY GF THE NEW STYLE

Scheerbart, P: Glasarchitektur, Berlin, 1914.
Taut, B: Dre Stadtkrone, Jena, 1919.
Ein Wohknhaus, Stuttgart, 1927.
Modern Architecture, London, 1929.
(German Version; Die Neue Baukunst, Berlin, 1920.)
(no author given): The Tribune Tower Competition, Chicago, 1923.
Wingler, Hans M: Das Bauhaus, 1919-7933, Cologne, 1962.
Gropius, Gropius and Bayer: Bauhaus 1979-1928, New York, 1938
(for the English texts af Bauhaus documents
quoted in the pages that follow).
Gropius, W: fnternationale Architektur, Munich, 1925.
Bauhausbauten Dessau, Munich, 1930.
Kandinsky, W: Punkt und Linie zu Fldche, Munich, 1925.
Klee, P: Paédagogisches Skizzendbuch, Munich, 1926,
Johnson, P: Afies van der Rohe, Museum of Modern Art, New York,
(2nd edn.), 1953.
Behrendt, W. C: Der Sieg des Neuen Baustils, Stuttgart, 1927.
von Senger, A: Arisis der Architektur, Zurich, 1928.
Schnaidt, C: Hannes Meyer, Teufen, 1965.
Hilbersheimer, L: Internationale Neue Baukunst, Stuttgart, 1927.
Grosstadt-Architektur, Stuttgart, 1927.
Hallenbauten, Stuttgart, 1928,
Beton als Gestalter, Stuttgart, 1928.
Korn, A: Glas im Bau und als Gebrauchsgegenstand, Berlin, 1929.
Piatz, G: Die Baukunst der neuesten Zett, Berlin, 1927.
Mendeisohn, E: Amerika, Berlin, 1928.
Russland-Europa- Amerika, Berlin, 1929.
Giedion, S: Bauen in Frankreich, Eisen, Etsenbeton, Leipzig, 1928,
Moholy-Nagy, L: Von Material su Architektur, Munich, 1929.
(English translation: The New Vision, Documents of
Modern Art: Vol, 3, George Wittenborn, New York,
1949, from which most of the quotations in the follow-
ing pages are taken.)


19: The Berlin school

IN SPITE OF the appearance of notable Modern buildings in cities such as
Dessau and Stuttgart, the main power and strength of the German contri-
bution to mainstream Modern architecture came from Berlin—indeed,
most of these notable buildings in other towns were the work of architects
with, at least, Berlin connections.’ As the second artistic capital of Europe,
after Paris, it was clearly likely to produce werk of interest, but it contained,
in addition, a remarkable group of architectural talents. No other centre in
the early Twenties could have boasted, as Berlin could, more than a dozen
progressive architects of more than average competence, sufficiently restl-
ient in mental constitution to take in their stride a major aesthetic revolu-
tion, from Expressionism to Elementarism, and to design in either style
with equal vigour and assurance. Yet Bruno Taut, Mies van der Rohe,
Erich Mendelsohn, and Walter Gropius, were as typical of the Berlin
architecture of 1919 as of 1926, their contributions to the second phase were
as notable as to the first, and all but Mendelsohn did as much to make the
skyscraper typical of Expressionism as they did to make the Stediung
typical of the Elementarist phase that runs into the International Style.

The theories of Erich Mendelsohn have been discussed in an earlier
chapter, those of Gropius will be discussed in the next: for the moment we
are concerned with Bruno Taut and Mies van der Rohe. As a mirror of the
ideas current in his time, rather than as an original thinker, Taut is of the
greatest interest: at the end of the T'wenties he contributed to the group
of encyclopaedic works on Modern architecture the only one in a ‘popular’
vein; in the course of the decade he produced a number of minor pieces of
documentary interest, and at its very beginning he produced what is, his-
torically, his most important book, because it is one of the few major
documents of the Expressionist phase that can be set beside Mendelsohn’s
lectures—Dre Stadikrone.

This book, written in 1919 and dedicated, understandably, to the Fried-

'The next three chapters are, again, much in debt to the personal memoirs of
survivors of the period—Mart Stam, Artur Kom, and Walter Segal—and to Sybil
Moholy-Nagy’s book about her husband, Moholy-Nagy (New York, 1990).

fertigen, the Peaceable, is primarily concerned with town planning, but in
a manner contrary in intention, if not in effect, to anything produced aut-
aide the Berlin Expressionist circle. It is, in part, a polemic against advanced
town planning as it then stood, with its emphasis on residential planning,
zoning and Garden City ideals, These, according to Taut, do not produce
a complete city but a Rumpf ohne Kopf—urbanisation without an emphatic
central feature. Such a feature, a Stadtkrone, was for Taut a symbolic
public building making 2 bold silhouette against the sky, visible from all
over the city, much as an oriental pageda or minaret, or a Gothic spire
could be seen to dominate the surrounding buildings—indeed, the whole
tone ef the beok is summed up by its frontispiece, a reproduction of Van
Eyck’s St Barbara seated before her Gothic tower.

His own positive suggestions envisage a city of more or less radial plan,
at little more than Garden City densities, focused on an agglomeration of
public buildings disposed biaxially in a central rectangle, and capped by
a glass tower, usually shown in his sketches with the sun rising or setting
behind it. It is worth noting that Le Corbusier’s Ville Contemporaine
would have presented a somewhat sim:lar appearance, though designed from
a diametrically opposed point of view, for the glass tower of Taut’s ideal
city has a very different derivation, It appears to have been, by months or
only minutes, the first of a number of glass-tower projects that ornamented
Berlin architectural thought around 1920, but it is the only one that can
be shown to derive directly from an inspiration that can only be suspected
in the case of the others—Paul Scheerbart’s book Glasarchttektur.

Taut and Scheerbart had known one another before 1913 (Scheerbart
died in 1915) and whether or not Taut’s glass pavilion at Cologne in ror4
was inspired by Scheerbart, it was certainly dedicated to him,? just as
Glasarchitektur, which appeared in the same year, was dedicated to ‘aut,
Die Stadtkrone opens and closes with longish quotations, architectural in
theme, from Scheerbart’s ‘Hippopotamus Novel’ (Nilpferdroman) Immer
Mutig, and is shot through with his faith in glass as a building material
and sensitivity to its visual qualities,

The appearance of such a person as Scheerbart, best known as an eccen-
tric writer of fantasticated novels verging on what would now be called
science-fiction, in the annals of anything so intimately bound up with the
more aseptic side of Modern architecture as glass walling, may occasion
surprise, but his passionate faith in glass and hatred of masonry

Glass brings us the new Age
Brick-culture does us nothing but harm’?

* According to Kenrad Werner Schultz, who devotes nearly two pages to
influences bearing on the glass architecture of the Cologne Exhibition in his book
Glas in der Architektur der Gegenwart (Stuttgart, 1929).

4 This was quoted by Taut in a book about his own private house, Ein Wohnhews
(Stuttgart, 1927), and seems to be the Jast trace of Scheerbart m his work, literary

ee

OE ER i

were backed by a sharp sense of the practicalities of using the new material,
while the possible impact of the book on architects of a sacklich turn of
rind was heightened by its very sober typography, quite unlike the Yellow-
Book style of Scheerbart’s novels. In spite of the clearly Art Nouveau
aesthetic of detailing and decoration that runs through the book, in spite
of its Futurist visions of a night landscape criss-crossed by railways ablaze
with coloured lights, illuminated motorboats, liners, and the glazed water-
side palaces of a new Venice, Zeppelins cruising overhead picking out the
shapes of the Alps with coloured searchlights, and glass-walled hotels
gleaming on every mountainside—in spite of all this he had a shrewd
appreciation of the problems of condensation, heat-loss, etc. that would arise
with all-glass walling, as well as a clear sense of the possibilities of metal
and concrete structure in combination with glass.

Indeed, technically, his vision anticipates a great deal that was to come
about in the Twenties, including such concepts as a new relationship of
house to garden through the use of glass wails and movable partitions. In
general, Taut does little more than skim off the superficial possibilities that
Scheerbart suggests, but others, on whom the influence is too diffuse to
be easily demonstrated (because they had the War years in which to digest
the book and forget about its author) take it much deeper. In the case of
the Bauhaus, which went further than anyone else in research into light
and transparency, there are both strong possibilities and strong hints of a
direct influence. The first proclamation of the Weimar Bauhaus, which
may even have been roughed out in Berlin, has on its cover a woodcut by
Lyonel Feininger showing the entirely Scheerbartian conception of a
Gothic cathedral topped by beacon lights, while, inside, it has Groptus
writing of ‘a building like a crystal symbol’ and calling for the elimination
of snobbish differentiation between hand-workers and brain-workers, just
az Scheerbart, in the passages from Jvimer Mutig that appeared in Dte
Stadtkrone, had prophesied

Kings walk with beggar-men . . , artisans with the men of learning.

Scheerbartian ideas could easily have been in Gropius’s mind at this time
since he was busy recruiting his first Bauhaus staff from the circle of Der
Sturm, which had published Giasarchitektur, and was in close touch with
both Bruno Taut and his brother Max,

Also in close touch with the two Tauts at the same time was Mies van der
Rohe, whose possible connections with Scheerbart are as intriguing as they
are undemonstrable. It seems inconceivable that his two projects for glass-
skycrapers, one for the Friedrichstrasse Station competition (1919) and
the other for an unspecified site (1921} should owe nothing to the prophet
of glass, especially in view of the care lavished on investigating their
or architectural. ‘Che house itself, designed some twa years previously, is probably
the last building with identifiable Scheerbartian qualities built by anybody.

optical qualities as reflectors and refractors of light, and their conspicuously
Expressionist forms, which would have fitted them admirably for the role
of Stadtkronen, but the fact remains that when Mies came to discuss them
in print (in Bruno ‘Faut’s magazine Frikicht) he did so in terms that are
almost the opposite of Scheerbart’s romanticism.

Skyscrapera reveal their bold structural pattern during construction, Only then

does the gigantic steel web seem impressive, When the outer walls are put in

place, the structural system which is the basis of all artistic design, is hidden in

a chacs of meaningless and trivial forms... . Instead of trying te sclve new prob-

lems with old forms, we should develop the new forma from the very nature of

the new problems.

We can see the new strictural principles most clearly when we use glags in

place of the outer walls, which is feasible teday since in a skeleton building

these outer walls do not actually carry weight. The use of glass imposes new
solutions, ,..

I discovered by working with actual glass models that che important thing is the

play of reflections, and not the effect of tight and shadew asin ardinary buildings,
The tough tone, the fascination with skeletal structure, belong to a different
world to Scheerbart’s, the world of Lissitsky, Werner Graeff and the G
group which was te be formed within less than twelve months of this being
written,

Also, between the Friedrichstrasse competition and the writing of
these words, Berlin architects had involved themselves in two other sky-
scraper competitions, and had drastically overhauled their ideas in the
process.

Many entries for the Friedrichstrasse had clearly Scheerbartian inspira-
tions—elaborately faceted glass towers, or towers with curvilinear glass
pavilions at their feet—but the Koenigsberg competition and that for the
Chicago Tribune Tower produced work of a different order. Some con-
fusion surrounds both competitions because of designs that were completed,
but not submitted, yet were subsequently published, Thus the Koenigsberg
competition is now remembered chiefly for a design that seems never to
have been submitted—Mart Stam’s concrete-framed, glass-clad reworking
of the Sant’Elian theme of set-back floors and projecting lift-towers,
while the Chicago 7rrbune is remembered now for a whole group of designs
that were unnoticed, unplaced or unsubmitted.

While the most discussed,# and most admired, of all the entries was
Eliel Saarinen’s, placed second and since deservedly forgotten, the com-
petition attracted interest and entries from all over Scandinavia and the
German-speaking world. In a modified Wrightian style there were designs
from Bijvoet and Duiker (unplaced) and Lénberg-Holm (unsubmitted),
both making much of overhangs and cantilevered projections, and in the
new, tough Berlin style of severe framed structures in glass and reinforced
concrete, there were entries from Max Taut (unplaced) and Ludwig

“Typical of the discussion at its best are Irving K, Pond’s contributions to
Architectural Forum (New York, rgzr, pp. 41ff., 179ff.}.

Hilberseimer (unsubmitted), the latter representing an extrernity of stark
Zweckarchitektur, unrelieved by imagination or aesthetic intent.

Between these two groups, stylistically, lies the most interesting German
entry, the only one to keep the name of the Chicago 7rtbune alive in the
history-books: Gropius and Meyer’s. The design is of double importance
historically; it marks the recovery by Gropius of the strong line he had
pursued before 1914, and had lost in such Expressionist experiments as the
Weimar monument, the Sommerfeld and Otte houses; but it also signals the
emergence ofthe characteristic features of the second phase of Berlin
architecture. It puts vigorous emphasis on function and structure, by means
of a formal vocabulary derived partly from an appreciation of enginecring
structure, and partly from the Elementarist aesthetics of the Dutch and
Russian Abstractionists. Its top-heavy silhouette and fly-away balconies
seem chiefiy Russian in extraction (though the block form can be at least
paralleled in Mendelsohn’s Carmelkrone drawings of the same year} while
the factory-pattern fenestration over the whole block picks up the rhythm
of the elevations of the old Tribune printing works at the back of the site
in such a way as to integrate it fully into the design—an expression of sym-
pathy with engineer-architecture that can be found in no other entry for the
competition, and would probably have been beyond the aesthetic capacity
of anyone not trained in the Werkbund factory aesthetics of rg1o—r4,

This was also practically the last of the skyscraper projects, and with the
increasing availability of real work, Siedtkrene pipe-dreamsa recede from
the foreground of architectural thought in Berlin, and the accent of design
becomes, whatever Le Corbusier may have said to the contrary, pre-
dominantly horizontal, At the same time, leadership of the school tends
to pass from the Taut connection to that of the G group. However, the
school remained professionally coherent, no schism between Expressionists
and Elementarists appeared. Men changed their attitudes but not their
friends and in 1925 they regularised their solidarity by forming the Ring,
whose membership included at different times Gropius, Mies van der
Rohe, Bruns and Max Taut, Erich Mendelsohn, the Luckhardt brothers,
Hans Scharoun, Hugo Hiéring, Hans Poelzig, Artur Korn, Richard
Doecker, Otte Bartning, Hilberseimer and others—the complete circle of
progressive Berlin architects irrespective of their stylistic preferences.

With the waning of the influence of the ex-Expressionists, with Gropius
largely taken up with the affairs of the Bauhaus, and Mendelsohn deeply
involved in his connection with various large Jewish trading houses, the
leadership of the Ring went almost automatically to Mies van der Rohe, and
he fulfilled this role with increasing authority as the decade grew older.
That authority among his fellow architects, whom he overtops as surely as
did Le Corbusier those of Paris, seems to have depended leas on great
force of personality or dazzling originality, than on sheer unshakeable merit
as a designer. In whatever style circumstances or inclination Jed him to

design, he was outstanding, possibly because he was, he claimed, indif-
ferent to style.

As with many who profess such an indifference, his work, and particularly
his sketches, showed in the early Twenties an almost excessive suscepti-
bility to formal influence, but with the proviso that everything that he
absorbed was transmuted. Thus, he emerges from his encounters with
Stam and Lissitsky as less original than either, but a more convincing
designer than both. His accession to the tough-minded school of design,
of which they, and Werner Graeff, were the main propulsive force, is marked
by a design as important as Gropius and Meyer’s Tribune project, and for
similar reasons: a concrete office block of dominantly horizontal design.

Not a frame structure, it was envisaged as a post-and-slab (or, since the
posts were rectangular in section, tapered and connected by beams under
the slab, a portal-frame-and-slab) construction, but with a structural and
functional peculiarity that seems to have some connection with Wright's
Larkin Building. Hilberseimer describes it thus

Here, the floor.plate is turned up verticaily at the end of the cantilevers and

becomes the outer wall, serving as a backing to the filing-cabinets which have

been transferred to the outer wall from the inner space for the sake of a better-
arranged layout
but makes no reference to the fact that the filing systems of the Larkin
building were similarly arranged (a device that Mies could have known
through Berlage). He also describes the arrangement of the fenestration in
a Inanner reminiscent of Le Corbusier's ‘on wii par étage’

Above the filing lies a continuous band of window rising to the ficor above,

without supports or masonry. By this means the ranging of the floors (one above

the other) is most energetically emphasised.
However, Hilberseimer makes no reference to elements of other styles
that linger in this building—the axial planning and disposition of the en-
trance, and the fact that each floor cantilevers out a little further than that
below, giving an almost Expressionist sithauette.

The degree of caution revealed here, retaining such parts of past disci-
plines as are necessary to stabilise new adventures in design, is atill present
even in the most ‘revolutionary’ of Mies’s projects, the brick villa of 1923.
Much has been made of certain superficial resemblances between the plan
of this design and paintings by van Doesburg, but it is a richer and more
complex concept than that. The slabs of brick that form the structure can
be regarded as ‘elements’ in Kiesler’s sense, disposed in an ‘unending
gpace’ such as Lissitsky might have specified. The relationship of these
brick slabs to the volumes they do not completely enclose can indeed be
likened to the bars of dark paint that do not completely enclose the areas
of colour in van Doesburg’s painting ‘Rhythm of a Russian Dance’, but
this loose relationship of house to surroundings might equally well have a
Scheerbartian inspiration, just as the carefully preserved purity of the wall


slabs has an unmistakable origin in Berlage. Above all, the massing of the
composition belongs to an older tradition than the Elementarist approach
noted by Barr and others. Although the plan itself is perhaps the first real
advance on Wright's Prairie houses, the elevations are Jess up-to-date in a
way than those of some Dutch Wrightians, for there is a complete lack of
consequential overhangs. Instead, the elevations pyramid back to a taller
central block—the silhouette is that of a Stadthrone in miniature, or of
picturesquely grouped neo-Classical villa, and reveals the strength of
Mies’s Schinkelschiiler inclinations even at this late date.

The caution continues through the group of brick buildings, actually
executed, that stern from this project. In the Wolf House at Guben some-
thing of the pyramidal massing is retained, even in 1926, and the brickwork
shows an almost Dutch prettiness in the use of bond-patterns and the use
of Dudok-like re-entrants on vertical arrises. ‘The Monument to the Com-
Mmunist ‘martyrs’ Karl Liebnecht and Rosa Luxemburg, built in Berlin in
the same year, has closer affiliations with Abstract art in the massing of tts
projecting rectangular volumes, but it also presents an appearance of
Expressionist cragginess, and its surface of twisted and overburned bricks
calls to mind the textured upper storey of Mendelsohn’s double villa on
the Carolingerplatz, Charlottenburg. It is only in the Lange house at
Krefeld, as late ag 1928, still in brick, that anything like the entirely tough
tone of his earlier writings and associates really comes to the surface. The
street front of this house in particular gives an impression of studied prace-
lessness, in spite of its warm colours, although further inspection will
show that a most refined sense (if not systern) of proportion relates the parts.
Even here, where his manner of design reaches an extreme point, the facts
of the building cannot quite be equated with the toughest of his theoretical
propositions of the G epoch

We reject all aesthetic speculation, all doctrine, all formalism
or

We refuse to recognise problema of form; we recognise only problems of building.

Form is not the aim of our work, only the result

Form by itself does not exist

Form as an aim is formalism, and that we reject,
The ‘problems of building’ that he was prepared to recognise were struc-
ture, planning disciplines, industrialisation of methods—in general, the
sort of problem that would attract the attention of Werner Graeff and others
who found the Bauhaus too ‘arty’. Nevertheless, it is interesting that out
of this rather negative approach there does emerge a positive and even
familiar philosophy of design: Zeitgeist plus Rationalism equals Raumge-
staltung.

Greek temples, Roman Basilicas and mediaeval cathedrals are significant to us

a3 the creations of a whole epoch, rather than as works of individual architects, ...

They are pure expressions of their time. Their true meaning is that they are

symbuls of their epoch.

Architecture is the will of the epoch translated into apace.

If we discard all romantic conceptions, we can recognise the stone structures of

the Greeks, the brick and concrete construction of the Romans and the medieval

cathedrals, all as bold engineering achievernents, .. .

Our utilitarian buildings can become worthy of the name of architecture only

if they truly interpret their time by their perfect functional expression.
Whatever the personal and literary influences bearing on this attitude, there
Was @ growing social pressure, quite outside the G connection, that drove
his ideas, and those of other Berlin architects, in this Rationalist and
Functionalist direction in the middle of the Twenties. From about 1924
onwards, progressive organs of local government in different parts of Ger-
many began to commission and build designs for large-scale, low-cost
housing developments, and a surprisingly large proportion of this work
went to comparatively extreme Modernists—the Ring were heavily en-
gaged in the suburbs of Berlin until after 1930. Given the financial con-
dition of the country at the time, these Siediungen had to be built down to
the most stringent budgets, and 2 ruthlessly rational approach was required
to extract the maximum possible performance from materials, machinery,
and every square meter of built floor space and occupied site area. Research
into economy and maximum performance was carried to its farthest point
in this period by Ernst May and his team at the Municipal Building Depart-
ment at Frankfurt am Main, who developed special building techniques,
and special furniture and equipment in order to hold down costs and speed
up the work of building, Unusually, for a programme of this kind, the
architectural quality of the buildings was high, and the quality of the
planning has become a by-word, particularly the Romerstadt scheme,
Although Berlin architects did not dispose of an equivalent research organi-
sation® their work does not lag far behind that of May's office, and the
actuai architectural quality of their work 1s very similar to his.

‘That quality can be fairly simply described: most such developments
were in three- to five-storey blocks of some length, strung out along access
roads; their structure was of bricks or, more likely, cinder-blocks and
almost always rendered over, the windows smallish, their precise size being
determined usually by minimum daylighting standards. Any aesthetics
these lengthy facades might boast had to be fought for, and had to be ex-
pressed from the given elements, In practice this meant that the colour of
the rendering might be changed for the ‘basement’ or ‘attic’ stories, that
rhythmic and proportional effects might be contrived from the disposition
of the fenestration, and that the corner of a street, or other given inter-

* It is worth noting that Gropius’a main papers on mass-housing, which contri-
buted so much to world thought, contributed little to German thought on the sub-
ject, since they did not appear until r9z9 and 1931, by which time the work of
May, in particular, and various Ring architects had already given an empirical and
partly statistical basis to mass-housing work in Germany.

i

I OE OE

ruption, such as the need to provide local shops, might provide the oppor-
tunity for some three-dimensional relief. The generally high standard of
at least the facades of these developments is a major achievement of the
German architecture of the Twenties, but this achievement has its ironical
aspect, for, since these low cost developments also constituted the bulk of
the Modern architecture that could be seen around Berlin, they gave
rise to the legend (backed by a certain amount of Corbusian wishful
thinking} that Modern architecture is, by its nature, a cheap style of
building.

Even so, the participation of Mies van der Rohe, with his well-known
preference for de luxe finishes, etc. in the business of Siediung building
still comes as something of a surprise, yet his small development on the
Afrikanische Strasse, and the related block at Weissenhof, are by far
the most distinguished of all such buildings architecturally, though
their effect depends almost entirely on the size and spacing of the
window-openings.

The block at Weissenhof was one of the best known and most widely
discussed buildings in the period, partly because of its inherent qualities,
and partly because of its situation. In 1925, the Deutscher Werkbund
invited Mies to take charge of the overall planning of what was to be their
first major exhibition since Cologne, a group of residential buildings, some
permanent, some transient, on the small hill of Weissenhof, overlooking
Stuttgart, to he opened to the public in the summer of 1927. Since time was
short, and moat of the buildings would still be in the process of design when
the overall plan was complete, the town-planning problem was one of per-
missive discipline, giving an ordered relationship to a number of blocks
whose very bulk was still indeterminate at this early stage.

The solution was net the academic one of driving an array of axes across
the site and letting the buildings square up to them as best they could—
the site was too small, too irregular in outline and too beset with topo-
graphical accidents for that. Instead, Mies organised his anticipated volumes
across the rise of the hill in the form of what might nowadays be termed
a ‘terrain-sculpture —a related sequence of rectangular blocks and con-
necting terraces, organised somewhat in the manner of the brick villa pro-
ject of 1923, with his own block of flats serving as a Stadtkrane at the highest
point. This highly original concept, the first new contribution to three-
dimensional town planning since Sant'Elia, had to be sacrificed in part to
local preferences and financial stringencies (the terraces were replaced by
conventional road access, which broke up the continuity of the sculptural
whole} but even so, a good deal of the initial concept survived, and can still
be appreciated in aerial photographs taken at the time.

It is hardly necessary to record that Mies made no written pronounce-
ment about this remarkable piece of planning; instead, he explained his
intentions at Weissenhef in two apparently contradictory statements about

the problem of residential design. The contradiction, though striking, is in
fact superficial, and it will be seen that the libertarian sentiments of the
first do not rule out the special case discussed in the second,

The problem of the modern dwelling is primarily architectural, in spite of ita

technical and economic aspects. It is a complex problem of planning and can

therefore only be solved by creative minds, not by calculation and organisation,

Therefore, I felt it imperative, in spite of current talk about Rationalisation and

Standardisation, to keep the project at Stuttgart from being one-sided or doctri-

naire. I have therefore invited leading representatives of the Modern Move-

ment to make their contribution to the problem of the modern dwelling.
One cannot but notice the deviation from the earlier tough tone which
appears in this statement. However, it returns, almost in the language of
1922 in the other statement

Today the factor of economy makes Rationalisation and Standardisation impera-

tive for rental housing, On the other hand the increased complexity of our

requirements demands flexibility. The future wili have to reckon with both.

For this purpose skeleton construction is the most suitable system. It makes pos-

sible Rationalised building methods and allows the interior to be freely divided,

If we regard kitchens and bathrooms, becsuse of their plumbing, as a fixed

core, then all other space may be partitioned by means of movable walis. This

should, | believe, satisfy all normal requirements.

Although his block of flats at Weissenhof did not have what would normally
be cailed movable partitions, it did have a skeleton frame (though this was
invisible on the outside}, it did treat the kitchens and bathrooms as fixed
cores, and did arrange each of the twenty-four main flats differently in
plan. Mies here gave the most striking and convincing demonstration of
the concept of the flexible plan that had been seen up to this date, even
though most of the theoretical pronouncements on the subject had come
from Le Corbusier.

Comparison with Le Corbusier is both apt and proper at this pomt, for,
quite apart from his achievements as a town planner and a flat planner at
Weissenhaf, Mies also effected an even bigger feat there; he made the
Modern Movement visibly international. Le Corbusier, Qud, Stam and
the Belgian, Victor Bourgevis all contributed buildings to the scheme;
Oud and Stam in the form of terraces of small cottages, Le Corbusier a
double house and a Matson Citrohan, and Victor Bourgeois a single house
slightly apart from the rest of the exhibition. However, visitors to Weissen-
hef could not but notice that the buildings designed by non-Germans were
quite at home with their close neighbours designed by members of the
Ring, and that a conspicuous harmony of style pervaded the whole Sied-
lung. ‘This manifest international coherence had a double significance: on
the one hand it made Modern architecture the target of chauvinist critics
all over the world, whether they were Nazis, the Mauclair connection in
France, or the wilder followers of Frank Lloyd Wright; on the other hand,
following the lead established by Gropius’ book Internationale Architektur,
it led Alfred H. Barr to apply to mature Modern architecture of the main-

Se


a

stream that stylistic label that has adhered to it ever since—‘The Inter-
national Style’.

Yet, in spite of these international overtones, Weissenhof was primarily
a manifestation of Ring architecture, and, apart from the four non-German
designers mentioned above (and for Stam ‘non-German’ is a dubiously
valid epithet) the remaining eleven were mostly Berliners by professional
domicile, birth or attachment—Mies himself, Gropius, Hilberseimer, the
Tauts, Scharoun, Deecker, Behrens, etc. The style to which the foreign
designs conformed was the style of Berlin by sheer pressure of numbers.
No ather city at the time could have mustered, as Berlin could by this date,
over a dozen convinced Modernists of recognisable talent. Paris might
have produced four, the whole of Holland about the same number, the rest
of the world another eight or so. In terms of the growth of the Modern
Movement, Germany’s greatest contribution was the sheer quantity of men
and buildings produced by Berlin, but in terms of the subsequent distri-
bution of that Movement across the Western world, Germany’s two great
contributiens are an institution that was an entirely Berlin conception,
albeit located elsewhere, the Bauhaus, which will be discussed in the next
chapter, and a spate of encyclopaedic books, discussed two chapters hence,
of which the most important, Moholy-Nagy’s Von Material zu Architektur,
was itself a Bauhaus product.

20: The Bauhaus

ALTHOUGH THE BAUHAUS has became so established a symbol of Modernity
that the adoption of its methods is a recognised sign that a school has ‘gone
Modern’, it had many roots in the past. [t was formed by the fusion, in
1919, of two existing institutions in Weimar, one an Academy of Fine Arts
with a tradition that reached back into history, the other a Kunstgewerbe
school founded by Henry van de Velde after he came to Weimar in 1903 at
the behest of the last Grand duke of Sachsen-Weimar, at the beginning of
that wave of enthusiasm for umproved design that also produced the
Werkbund. From both institutions Gropius inherited buildings, a few
members of the pre-War staffs, and, te begin with, what might be termed
the ‘goodwill’.

Though his action in fusing the two schools was a pioneering gesture, it
was not an original idea. Something of the kind had been in van de Velde’s
mind even before he came to Weimar, and while he was there proposals
came from the Academy for closer relationships between the two schools,
At the level of practical experiment, Poelzig at Breslau had instituted craft
workshops in the Academy even before 1914, and in the same period
Richard Meyer ran art classes in the Kusstpewerbe school at Hamburg,! The
ground was thus prepared well before Gropius took over the two schools in
Weimar, and his action realised a concept that was already current in pro-
gressive circles. Over and above this, the staff he gathered round him in
the first years of the Bauhaus could hardly be called new men possessed of
dangerous new ideas. They were recruited mainly through two overlapping
connections that had existed before the War—Der Sturm in Berlin, and his
friends in musical circles in Vienna. Most of the men produced in this way
had been born before 18go, their art and their reputations had begun to
mature before 1914.

Most of them were also painters, in spite of the fact that the Bauhaus
was intended to train for all branches of design, culmunating in architec-

™Qn the subject of attempts to bring the Academies and the Kunstgewerbe
schools clover together, see Nikolaus Pevaner, Academies of Art (Cambridge, 1940,

Pp. 274, 275).

ture, And all, in the public mind at least, were Expressionists. This last point
not only alarmed the citizens of Weimar, and laid the foundations of that
hostility that was eventually to make Gropius’s pesition untenable, but it
also imposed certain strains on the internal orientations of the school itself.
Tt was, clearly, inevitable that Gropius should have to rely on men and
connections established before the War, but later staff-student tensions
and minor ‘palace revolutions’ were equally inevitably engendered by the
need for the older generation with pre-War tdeas to adapt themselves to
changed circumstances. Although the outwardly visible change in Bauhaus
policy is associated with the visits of van Doesburg, and the admission of
Moholy-Nagy to the staff in 1923, the Bauhaus had, in fact, been in process
of transformation almost from its foundation and was to remain so until
its dissolution in Berlin in 1933. Much of its historical interest lies in the
manner in which it reflects the changing aspect of German architectural
thought in the Twenties, though its ultimate historical significance will
always lie in the effect it had on international architectural thought in the
Thirties and Forties.

The Scheerbartian qualities of the first Bauhaus Proclamation have al-
ready been mentioned, Lyonel Feininger, who designed the cover, was a
member of the Sturmkreis, and the medium he employed, a woodcut, was
one of the favourites of Expressionist artists. The text of Gropius’s state-
ment is entirely in character with the cover.

The complete building is the ultimate aim of the visual arts, Their highest

function was once the decoration of buildings. They exist, nowadays, in an

isolation from which they can be rescued only by the conscious joint efforta of

all craftsrnen. Architects, painters and sculptors must recognise once more the

nature of buildings az composite entities. Only then will their works be per-

meated with that architectonic feeling which has become lost in the art of the
Ons.

So far, this is not very different from the line taken by, say, Berlage before

1910, but the next two paragraphs have a more specifically Expressionist
quality.
Architects, painters and sculptors, we must all turn to the crafts.
Then there will be no ‘profeasional art’, There is no essential difference between
the artist and the craftsman: the artist is a craftsman raised to a higher power.
In rare moments of dlumination, unbidden by conscious will, the Grace of
Heaven may cause his handicraft to blossom into art. A groundwork of craft-
discipline is essential to every artist.
Let us create a new guild of craftsmen, without the class-snobbery that tries to
erect a haughty barrier berween artist and craftsrnan, Let us conceive, consider
and create together the new building of the future that will bring ail inte one
single integrated creation: architectute, painting and sculpture rising to Heaven
out ot the hands of a million craftsmen, the crystal symbol of the new faith of
@ Tuture.

What cannot fail to astonish in this statement is that a person like Groptus,
grounded in the Werkbund and the office of Behrens, in touch with Der
Sturm and its emphasis on Futurism, should be capable at this time of

making no reference whatever to machinery, and should take his stand
solely on the Morrisian standpoint of inspired craftsmanship. It was not
until 1923 that the Bauhaus was to show any outward interest in mechanised
production, and the problems of designing for it. By that time, its teaching
methods had become inseparably bound up with craftsmanship—a point
that its apologists found sufficrently embarrassing to need explanation.

Yet this craftsmantly inclination was te be one of the main strengths of
the Bauhaus method of education, because it made possible the elaboration
of an unacademic teaching system that could not, at that time, have been
based upon a mechanistic approach. Handicraft, as a teaching discipline,
implies ‘learning by doing’ rather than learning by reading or listening to
lectures, and this, however its methods and intentions may have been
modified by different teachers at various times, became the ‘Bauhaus
Method’ and ultimately the norm for advanced architectural training all
over the world, The idea of ‘learning by doing’ is probably owed chiefly to
Fribel, as Frederick Logan has pointed out,’ but it may well owe a great
deal also to the established methods of Kunstgewerbeschule workshop in-
struction, and the basic innovation of the Bauhaus—implicit in the way
the school was formed in the first place—lay in the introduction of these
handicraft methods into Fine Art instruction, The other great innovation
was the determination to cleanse every incoming student’s mind of all pre-
conceptions and to put him, so to speak, back into Kindergarten to start
again from scratch. This was effected through the Vorkurs, or preliminary
course, which has acquired such fame that it has come to be regarded as
the essence, even the entirety, of the Bauhaus Method.

The conception and early elaboration of the Verkurs was the work of
Johannes Itten, a Swiss painter with pedagogical interests, whom Groptus
had met through his musical connections, and Georg Muche, a young
Sturmktinstler. The aims of the course were set out in specific terms only in
1922, when the first flurry of excitement had died down a little and some-
thing like an Itten-system could be said to exist. On the occasion of an
exhibition of works by Bauhaus ‘apprentices’ and 'journeymen’ Itten wrote
an introduction to the catalogue which reads, in part

The course is intended to liberate the student's creative power, to give him an
understanding of Nature's materials, and to acquaint him with the basic prin-
ciples which underly all creative activity in the visual arts. Every new student
arrives encumbered with a mass of accumulated information which he must
abandon before he can achieve perception and knowledge that are really his own.
If he is ta work in wood, for example, he must have a ‘feeling’ for wood. He must
alse understand its relation to other materials . . . combining and composing
therm to make their relationship fully apparent,

Preparatory work also involvea exact depiction of actual] materials. [f a student
draws or paints a piece of wood true to nature in every detail, it will help him
to understand the material, The work of old masters, auch as Bosch, Meister
Francke or Griinewald also offers instruction in the study of form, which is an

"In the College Art Journal (New York, Fall 1950, p. 3641.),


—— +.

essential part of the preliminary course, This instruction is intended to enable
the student to perceive the harmoniaus relationship of different rhythms and to
express such harmony through the use of one or several materials, The pre-
liminary course concerns the student's whole personality, since it seeks to
liberate him, to make him stand on his own feet, and makes it possible for him
to gain a knowledge of both material and form through direct experience,

As a matter of principte, each apprentice has to do his own designing. ...

‘The underlying assumptions of this document can best be brought out by
making flat contrasts between it and the common assumptions of Academic
teaching. An obvious one is that the laws of form are to be found in the
works of German primitives, not in the Classics, but more important ones
are: the idea of vocation to a material or technique, not to a function in
society; the liberation of innate abilities, not the acquisition of methods;
the cultivation of intuitive sensibility, not the acquirement of knowledge:
and, most significant of all, the destruction of previous training, not its
exploitation, the intention to return incoming students to the neble savagery
of childhood. To have gone so far against established precedent without
roving forward into a mechanised culture, meant that Itten had to go right
outside the general body of Western, Rational thought, and under his
influence Bauhaus students involved themselves in the study of mediaeval!
mystics like Eckhart, and Eastern spiritual discipline such as Mazdaznan,
Tao and Zen. The alarm of the citizens of Weimar, city of Goethe, can
easily be understood, as can the contempt felt by the tough-minded con-
nection in Berlin.

No document now exists that gives 2 contemporary estimate of the place
of the Yordurs, its handicrafts and intuitive approach to materials, in the
total Bauhaus curriculum of these early years: Gropius’s [dee und Aufbau
des Staatlichen Bauhauses Weimar did not appear until 1923, when changes
in the Bauhaus staff and methods were already under way, and his own
design methods had passed the point of decision marked by the Chicago
Tribune Project. Indeed, the great value of this dacument lies in the fact
that it gives an extended survey of his opinions just at the time when he,
and the Bauhaus, were entering their period of greatest mastery and greatest
certainty about their position in the life and thought of the time. Ii it seems
to spend too much time labouring well-worn themes, it is invaluable among
the literature of the period for its moderate tone and Rational exposition.

It opens with sweeping historical generalisations, through which a ver-
ston of Itten’s mysticism can be perceived,

The dominant spirit of our epoch is already recognisable although its form is

not yet clearly defined. The old dualistic world-concept which envisaged the

ego in opposition to the universe is rapidly losing ground. In its place is rising
the idea of a universal unity in which afl opposing forces exist in a state of
absolute balance.
Then follows a brief survey of the recent history of design, viewed from the
standpoint of the Werkbund: the decadence of architecture as the unifying
agent in creating a Gesamikunsiwerk, the failure of the Academies and the

decay of folk art, the need for Durchgeistigung

Only work which is the product of an inner compulsion can have spiritual

meaning. Mechanised work is lifeless, proper only to the lifeless machine . ,

the solution depends on a change in the individual's attitude toward his work
the isolation of the creative artist and the famine of industrial designer,
concluding with an extraordinarily self-satisfied estimate of the achieve-
toent of the nineteenth-century reformers,

Ruskin and Mortis in England, van de Velde in Belgium Ofbnch, Behrens

and others in Germany, and finally the Deutscher Werkbund, all sought and

finally found the basis of a reunion between creative artists and the industiial
world,
In view of this belief that the older masters were right, it ts not surprising
to find that in spite of much emphasis on intuition and innate ability, he
conceives the process of artistic creation in terms that Muthesius might
have proposed, as Raumgestattung.

The objective of all creative efforts in the visual arts is to give farm to space...

through his intuition, through his metaphysical powers, man discovera the

immaterial space of inward vision and inspiration. This conception of space
demands realisation in the material world. ...

In a work of art the laws of the physical world, the intellectual world and the

world of the spirit function and are expressed simultaneously,

This insistence on the spiritual emphasises, if emphasis were needed that
Gropius, at the time that he was setting up the second order of Bauhaus
teaching, the order of strict geometry and analysis, was far from being the
Materialist or Functionalist he is commonly thought to have been—indeed,
the Bauhaus had no Functienalist phase until Hannes Meyer took over on
Gropius's retirement.

The most curious feature of Idee und Aufbau, however, appears in the
next section, where he discusses the actual educational programme. Here,
in spite of what has been said earlier in favour of unity and against dualism,
he accepts a division of the teaching discipline into two halves, Werkiehre
and Formlehre, corresponding, in a general sense, to the curricula of the
two schoals that had been telescoped to form the Bauhaus. Later, to justifv
Formiehre he draws a musical analogy that, if anything, deepens the
division.

The musician who wants to make audible a musical idea, needs for its rendering

not only a musical instrument but also a knowledge of theory. Without thia

knowledge his idea will never emerge from chaos. . .. A corresponding know-
ledge of theory , .. must again be established as a basis for practice in the visual
arts,

This division of the teaching programme into two parallel parts, was to be
accompanied by three-fold division in time: first the Vorkurs, lasting six
months; next, three years’ instruction in a particular craft (metalwork,
pottery, weaving, woodwork, etc.) under regular articles of apprenticeship,
ending, for the successful student, with his Gesellenbrief or Journeyman's

a

i

Diploma; and lastly, a variable period of instruction in architecture, re-
search, etc. ending in a Master’s Diploma.

It shou!d be pointed out that Gropius aimed to close the central division
between Werklehre and Formlehre by the appointment of studio-masters
who were equally proficient on both sides, but in the end could only find
such ‘ambidextrous’ talents among his own Gesellen, Marcel Breuer, Josef
Albers, Herbert Bayer—all products of the first, Expressionist period.

The justification of Werklekre involves Gropius ina revealing justification
of handicrafts as a teaching discipline

The Bauhaus believes the machine to be our modern medium of design and

seeks to come to terms with it
he begins, betraying a major change of orientation since the Proclamation
of 1919.

But it would be senseless to launch a gifted apprentice straight into industry

without preparation in a craft....He would be stifled by the materialistic and

one-sided outiook predorminant in factories today. A craft, however, cannot con-
flict with the feeling for workmanship which, as an artist, he inevitably has, and
it is therefore the best opportunity for practical training.
This view of the crafts, as a buffer between sensitive spirits and the harsh
realities of mechanised production, naturally aroused the scorn of tough-
minded students, even inside the Bauhaus, but Gropius had another, and
more substantial justification.

The teaching of a craft is meant to prepare for designing for mass-praduction,

Starting with the simplest tools and least complicated jobs, he gradually acquires

ability to master more intricate problems and ta work with machines, while at

the same time he keeps in touch with the entire process of production from
start to finish...
and this became a sort of article of faith with the Bauhaus, and may be
found repeated, almost word for word, by Moholy-Nagy in 1928.

Gropius’s views on Formilehre are even more noteworthy, because they
indicate a shift of opinion, as compared with Itten, away from Irrationalism
and Mediaevalism toward a more Rational, International and even Aca-
demic position. One should note, to begin with, that his quarrel with the
“Academies” seems to have been chiefly that they had failed to conserve, or
produce, a body of theory about aesthetics

The academies, whose task it might have been to cultivate such 2 theory com-

pletely failed to da sa
and he then goes on to outline a body of ideas which is quite Academic in
its outlook, in the sense that most of the ideas can be paralleled in Blanc’s
Grammaire, though unlikely to have come from it direct

Forms and colours gain meaning only in so far as they are related to our inner

selves... . Red, for instance, evokes in us other emotions than does blue or

yellow, round forms speak differently to us than do pointed or jagged ones.

The elements which constitute the grammar of creation are ita rulea of rhythm,
of proportion, of light values, of full or empty space.


Although he makes no value judgements here as between one sort of forms
and another, there is very little, barring the references to space, to set this
apart from the ideas entertained by Le Corbusier at the same time, and
though the Phileban solids are not mentioned by Gropius in this document,
they were mentioned very shortly afterwards by Moholy-Nagy as being of
special value to the Bauhaus.

It is characteristic of that moment that Moholy-Nagy who saw me at Jenaer
(Gtasfabrik) while I changed my earlier cylindrical milk jugs into drop-shaped
ones, said to me 'Wagenfeld, how can you betray the Bauhaus like this? We have
always fought for simple basic shapes, cylinder, cube, cone, and now you are
making a soft form which is dead against all we have been after.”?

Here were wide grounds for later agreement with French ideas, agreement
that helped to create the International Style, and there were other grounds
as well, notably an acceptance by Gropius of the imperatives of Futurism,
In spite of the fact that the Bauhaus did not teach certain subjects that
might have been thought essential toa Machine Age architecture
. Construction in steel and reinforced concrete, statics, mechanics, physics,
industrial methods, heating, plumbing, technical chemistry.
echoes of Futurist rhetoric ring clearly in some passages of fdee und
Aufbau.
Architecture during the last few generations has become weakly sentimental,
aesthetic and decorative . . . this kind of architecture we disown. We aim to
create a clear, organic architecture whose inner logic wil] be radiant and naked,
unencumbered by lying facings and trickery, we want an architecture adapted
to our world of machines, radios and fast cars... with the increasing strength
and solidity of the new materials—steel, concrete, glass—and with the new
audacity of engineering, the ponderousness of the old methods of building is
giving way to anew lightness and airiness.
After this, implications of agreement with other post-War movements fol-

low naturally: with Mendelsohn
A new aesthetic of the horizontal! is beginning to develop
and with de Stzl

At the same time the symmetrical relationship of the parts of the building and
their orientation towards a central axis is being replaced by a new conception of
equilibrium which transmutes this dead symmetry of similar parts into an asyym-
metrical but rhythmical! balance,

idee und Aufoau concludes, after references to the need for standardisation,
to unity in diversity and to collaborative Gesamtkunstwerk, with sornething
that might have been expected to appear earlier—a statement of the
relationship of the Bauhaus to education in general. This, while making the
expected bow to the Montessori tradition and to ‘learning by doing’, con-

* This story, told by Wilhelm Wagenfeldt in a letter to Nikolaus Pevsner is the
nearest thing to confirmation of the stories that circulate about students being
severely reprimanded, even expelled, at the Bauhaus for not designing Rationally
in the tight ‘Rational atyle',

tains one revealing and surprising statement—surprising in the context of
its time, and of what the Bauhaus is often supposed to have been.

Its responsibility is to educate men and women to understand the world in
which they live, and ta invent and create forms aymbolising that world.
This again shows how far Gropius stood at the time from any Functionalist
ideas of formal Determinism, though his contemporaries appear to have
seen his position quite differently

At present, under the influence of these Constructivist ideas, reliance is placed

in industry and the art of the engineer, falling at once into an ‘Engineering

Romanticism’ grave enough to disturb somewhat its positive orientation: at all

events, ] hope that a new Academicism delighting in square Stylisation and

relying on an unenlightened play of mechanistic forms, will not be the fruit

of this art school, unique today in its Radicalism‘
The proof of freedom from formal Determmism is in the history of the
Bauhaus itself and in the revolution in aesthetics that manifested itself
around 1923. Though the change-over from Expressionism to Elementarism
was probably net regarded by many of the staff as the adoption of a better
set of symbols for their times, it appears that some at least of the students
saw matters in this light. In any case, while the replacement of the Vorkurs
of Itten and Muche by that of Moholy-Nagy and Albers marks the point of
crisis in this development, it was only the Vorkurs that was affected by this
change of staff, and other departments of the school made the change of
style without sackings and resignations.

Apart from Itten and possibly Gerhard Marcks, who was in charge of
the pottery workshop, it does not appear that any of the staff were particu-
larly committed to the old order, and there can be little doubt that it was
the adaptability of men like Muche, who transferred to another section,
and the uncommitted position of men like Klee and Kandinsky, both of
whom ran the Vorkurs for short periods during the crisis—it was this that
saw the Bauhaus through’a period of revolution that ought, on the face of
things, to have torn it apart.

Out of these men of transition, it ts Paul Klee who emerges with the
greatest distinction, and the greatest historical interest in this connection
because of his Paédagogisches Skizsenbuch, a transitional document that fits
neatly into the gap between Itten’s method and Moholy's. The notes and
sketches that form the Skizzenbuch are an edited selection from the papers
he accumulated in the course of his teaching experience in 1923 and 1924,
and the effect of the editing is to give a clear picture of a very definite view
of the nature of practical aesthetics. Klee visualises the process of design as
beginning with a point which moves, thus producing a line, which moves,
thus producing a plane, which moves, thus creating 2 volume. A somewhat
similar idea can be found in Kandinsky’s Pankt und Linie xu Fldche, but

* Paul Westheim, in an article on the state of the arta in Germany in L'Esprit
Nouveau, No. 20.

whereas Kandinsky couches his argument in high-level Abstractions, Klee
starts with the actual experience of making marks on paper, and remains
within sight of practicalities, thus conserving the less spiritual parts, at
least, of Itten's craftsmanly approach,

But Klee’s book also contains a pood deal of the international Abstract
body of ideas that had begun to appear in Gropius's thought by this time,
and he disposes ef Academic ideas like rhythmic proportion and the colour-
wheel, Also, he speaks in favour of a fairly determinate type of draughts-
manship—by tmplication in the first part of the Skizzenduch, but explicitly
in a lecture® he delivered in Jena in 1924, when be said

Where the possibility of measurement ia in doubt, tine cannot have been used
with absolute purity,

Where Klee’s transitional position becomes crucial, more than simply
interesting, is in his concept of space. Though he was no physicist, a num-
ber of drawings concerning the motion of bodies through space in the
Skiszenbuch suggest that he had a better intuitive grasp of both the New-
tonian and Einsteinian concepts of space than had some of his contem-
poraries who made great play with them in their writings, At the same time,
however, certain other drawings and some paintings done by him show
that he also commanded another conception of space sufhciently close to
that of the Elementarists to make their ideas readily acceptable to any
students who had passed through Klee’s hands, In drawings of about 1920,
such as [deal Menage, Lily and Zimmerperspektive, he draws rectilinear
objects as if they were transparent, ¢.g. all twelve edges of a cube would be
visible at once, but without serious deviations from central perspective, and
with the objects more or less orthogonally disposed. This gives a very strong
impression of space conceived as a regular, measurable, rectilinear con-
tinuum, as in Kiesler’s Cité dans ?’ Espace, and must have helped to clear
the way for Moholy-Nagy’s persistent handling of space in this way in his
courses.

Related, though by ne means identical, concepts of space can be seen in
Oskar Schlemmer's book Die Biihne im Bauhaus but, although Schlemmer
was one of those whom Itten had introduced to the staff and had been at
the Bauhaus since 1921, he too was one of the adaptables, and his book,
like Klee’s, was a symptom of the new order, for the series of Bawhaus-
biicher in which both appeared, was a brain-child of Moholy-Nagy, and is
one of the characteristic products of the second phase of Bauhaus activity.*
If that phase is to be given a definitive beginning, then it must be 1923. In

The text of this lecture has been published in English as On Modern Art
(London, 1945).

* It would, perhaps, be more accurate to say that the Bauhaus sponsored, rather
than published, these books, since all came out under the imprint of the Albert-
Langen-Verlag in Munich, while very few publications indeed appeared directly
under the Bauhaus imprimt at Weimar or Dessau.

~ ee

that year Itten went and Moholy came, Idee und Aufbau pave the teaching
programme the shape it was to retain until Gropius left, and the exhibition
which provoked Gropius to write this document, not only had the clearly
second-phase title of Art and Technology; a new Unity (Gropius also gave
a lecture under this title) but its main feature, the house 4m Horn, con-
tamed furniture and fittings, designed by Marcel Breuer, Alma Buscher,
Erich Brendel and others that show almost to the month the change of
attitude in the carpentry shop—there even exists a photograph of the
dressing-table by Breuer in which reflections in its circular and oval
mirrors have clearly been deliberately contrived to resemble the overlaps
and transparencies of one of Mcholy-Nagy’s paintings.

From this point forwards the establishment of the Bauhaus Method in
the form later spread across the world, seems to have been rapid. The
division between Werklehre and Formlehre was being progressively elimin-
ated by the appointment of new staff, and the school in general was acquir-
ing a more homogeneous and less eccentric tone. At the same time, things
became more businesslike in every sense of the word: closer ties with
manufacturing industry were established, and Bauhaus designs were in-
creasingly used, while at the same time there was a concomitant decline in
mysticism, metaphysics and the fancy dress that went with it

In accordance with Gropius’s opinion that the artist of today should wear con-

ventional clothes,

From about 1924 onwards, the products and buildings designed at the
Bauhaus also begin to exhibit a recognisable Bauhaus Style—and this must
be said even though Gropius and others have denied that there ever was
such 2 thing. Admittedly, style as such was not cultivated, but the forms
that were created to syrnbolise the world in which the Bauh@usler found
himself showed, naturally enough, considerable unanimity, and the reper-
toire of Phileban forms, space-grids, glossy synthetic finishes and tweedy
natural ones, the use of steel and glass and the evolution of a basically de
Sil manner of typography—all these added up, through constant repeti-
tion, to a genuinely unified style.

However, in less generalised terms, there are three main monuments that
epitomise the second phase of the Bauhaus: The Bauhausbiicher as a ven-
ture in publishing, Moholy-Nagy’s own Bauhausbuch as a summa aesthetica
of what the school stood for, and the new buildings at Dessau into which
the Bauhaus moved in 1926. Moholy’s book Von Material 2u Architektur
is of such importance to the present study that it will form the main subject
of the next chapter, but it was only one of a most remarkable series of books,
fourteen in all, that appeared between 1925 and 1930. Gropius and Moholy
were the co-editors of this series, which seems to have had (perhaps not
consciously) a double objective—to explain the Bauhaus to the world, and
to make available to the public that was interested in the Bauhaus those
other texta which they felt supported or extended their views.

Thus, titles that deal specifically with the Bauhaus itself include Klee’s
Pédagogtsches Skizzenbuch and Schlermmer's Die Biihne wn Bauhaus, one on
the Haus am Horn under the title Ein Versuchshaus by Adolf Meyer, Neue
Arbetten surveying recent work (1925) by staff and students, compiled by
Gropius, two by Mcoholy himseli—Malerei, Photegrahie, Film and Von
Material—and Gropius’s own description of the new buildings at Dessau,
under the title Bauhausbauten Dessau, On the other side, beginning with the
hard case of Kandinsky’s Punkt und Line, which did come from inside the
Bauhaus but is more profitably read as a personal document from one of the
pioneers of abstract art, the Bawhausbiicher give a unique international
coverage of the art of their time. The very first Bauhausbuch of all was
Gropius’s own Internationale Architektur, an avowedly popular survey of
Modern architecture from all over Europe which now has the added his-
torical significance of filling in the background of architectural knowledge
against which the new buildings at Dessau must have been designed.

However, the other Bauxhausiticher are not surveys, but personal state-
ments by artists of note: van Doesburg’s Gruadbegriffe der neuen pestaltenden
Kunst, Mondriaan’s Neue Gestaltung and Oud’s Hollandische Architektur,
to which reference has already been made, gave a very full coverage to
those aspects of Dutch theory that would interest the ‘Bauhaus Public’.
The Russian and Elementarist viewpoint was reinforced by Malevitsch’s
Die gegenstandslose Welt, which came out in 1928 at the same time as the
Bauhausbuch reprint of Gleize’s du Cubtsme—these two presumably being
intended to support Moholy’s own Von Material xu Architektur which
appeared at the same time. But equally revealing of Bauhaus atmosphere
and its changes were the titles that never saw the light of day, even though
they had been promised in the first flush of enthusiasm—a Merzéuch by the
Dadaist Kurt Schwitters, something on the AfA-gruppe by Lassak and
Kallai, a book on Russia by Adolf Behne, a book with the promising title of
Bildnerische Mechanik by Paul Klee, two issues of a Bildermagazin der
Zeit, an untitled book by Le Corbusier, and a treatise on Futurism by
Marinetti and Prampolini, It is not difficult to see why some of these were
not published—the book by Le Corbusier was presumably rendered super-
fluous by Hildebrandt’s translation of Vers une Architecture, that on Russia
by a spate of publications on the subject about 1927, but one cannot help
wondering if the disappearance of the Dadaist and Futurist titles may not
have been due to that increasing sense of respectability among German
Modernists that is expreased in Gropius’s desire that students should dress
conventionally. Even without these missing titles however, the BauAaus-
biicher represent one of the most concentrated publishing campaigns of
books on Modern art, 2s well as one of the most varied. They mark the
emergence of the Bauhaus from Expressionist provincialism into the main-
stream of Modern architecture, and the new buildings at Dessau show that
the school had moved into a position of undisputed leadership.


The need for these buildings arose through the continuing hoatility of
the authorities and the public of Weimar, who, in general, found Elemen-
tarism no more reassuring than Expressionism. Though local opposition
was countered by international support, even from former critics like van
Doesburg, the position of the school had been rendered untenable by
Easter, 1925, and an offer of re-establishment from the progressive mayor
of Dessau, Fritz Hesse, was too good to be overlooked. All the staff except
Gerhard Marcks, last of the ‘old guard’ and all but a few of the students
supported Gropius, and the school moved more or less entire, as a going
concer, to its new home at Dessau. Though housed in temporary quartets
for over a year, they were able to move into the new buildings by December
1926, when they were formally opened,

These buildings were the first unmistakable harbinger of an International
Style—the style that existed at Weissenhof in 1927, but had not existed at
Paris in 1925—and they were created in an atmosphere of awareness of
international developments that is made very clear by Gropius’s Bauhats-
buch. Its contents cover his own work and his immediate architectural
ancestors in the Werkbund, including van de Velde, they include alse pro-
jects by Mart Stam, the Wesnin brothers in Moscow, Matté-Trucco’s Fiat
factory, Dutch architects of the de Siajf and Wrightian persuasions, Wright
himself, Mendelsohn, Korn and other Berlin contemporaries, several Czech
architects who failed to establish themselves but were highly regarded
in Germany at the time, and Guevrekian and Le Corbusier from Paris,
Affinities, sometimes very close affinities, can be observed between the
Bauhaus buildings and many of these designs, but never outright borrowing
as in the Cologne Pavilion of rg14.

At Dessau, Gropius’s work seems to be informed by aesthetic determina-
tions which are at last the match of his social and technical convictions.
He seems less influenced by fashion as a consequence, and is able to make
genuinely original contributions to the formal usages of the growing
International Style. The planning, for stance, whatever its remote debts
to the Picturesque, Constructivist and Elementarist traditions, is lke
nothing else of the period in its centrifugal organisation-—by comparison
the work of a Mies or a van Doesburg appears timidly conventional in its
tendency to centralisation and pyramidal composition, Equally new and
rare is the mode of viston—the emphasis in Bauhausbanten Dessau ts first
and foremost on a set of air views of the buildings, an attitude that cannot
be paralleled at the time outside the mind of Malevitsch as later revealed in
Die Gegenstandslose Welt. The three-dimensional quality of the planning
is also remarkable, with two stories of the school bridged across a road, a
much more radical conception than the mere corridor bridges of Serafimov
and Kravets's gigantic light industry centre at Kharkov, whose design
must already have been under way.

Indeed, this central bridged section of the Bauhaus building casts light

7;

on aspects of Gropius that are at variance with the commonly held views
of him. The bridge was not forced on him by topography (as the great
glazed walls were, allegedly, forced on him by a gift of plate glass) for the
road which traverses the site was not there when he took over the land, and
was not usable until some time after the buildings were completed. The
decision to arrange the circulation and the buildings in this way appears to
have been an almost abstract decision made on an ideal terrain. Almost
abstract, rather than completely abstract, because behind the architec-
tonic decision lies a rather surprising social one—the road that divides the
site also divides the buildings into two distinct halves in spite of the bridge;
on one side the Bauhaus, on the other the Fachschule of the city of Dessau,
each with a separate entrance, almost suggesting that the ‘arrogant barrier
of snobbery’ had once more been erected between artist and craftsman.
In spite of this—-perhaps because of it-—-the Bauhaus remains a master-
piece of the new architecture. Indeed, it was the first really great werk in
the style, exceeding in subtiety and originality the few works that were
comparable with it in size, such as Mart Stam’s van Nelle factory in Rotter-
dam,” exceeding in size the few works that rivalled it in aesthetic quality,
such as the early work of Le Corbusier, It stands beside those works com-
pleted by Le Corbusier in 1926—the Cook house and the Palais du Peuple
wing—and Mies van der Rohe’s block-model for Weissenhof as the first
proof of the maturity of the new architecture, That maturity was confirmed
at Weissenhof when the buildings were seen, and seen to be internationally
unanimous in style, and with its international maturity the style became
explicable, to some extent, in verbal terms, with the result that Weissenhof
triggered off a spate of books by German authors that aim to deal encyclo-
paedically with the materials, the history or the aesthetics of the new style.

7 The normal attribution te the firm of Brinckmann and van der Vlugt is legally
accurate, but Mart Stam headed the design team within the office that produced
the main block, and that part is, apparentiy, entirely his own in inspiratior—it has
obvious affinities with the Koenipsberg project, in spite of the different structure—
and largely his in detail.

ey

103. Bruno Taut. City centre from die Stadtarane,

tog: central buildings of a projected city piled up

into a visual aymbol or landrnark.

tog. Lyonel Feininger, woedeut from the cover of

the first Bauhaus proclamation, 191g. Here, asin

: Taut's Stadtkrane, the emphasis on towers and

| light seems to derive from Scheerbart's
GlasarchiteRtur.
105. Eric Mendelsohn. Dye-vat and drving
tower, hat factory at Luckenwalde, 1921-1923:
the plain and elegant Functional forms mark the
end of hia Expressionist architecture.

—-


1o6. Mies van der Rehe. Gilass tower project for the
Friedrichstrasse station competition, Berlin, 1919.
Mies’s two projects far glass-walleadl skyscraper office
blocks are the last great manifestations af the
Scheerbartian glase-dream, and the first important
products of the skyscraper enthusiasm that gripped
Berlin architects in the early “]“wentics.

107. Grapius and Meyer. Skyscraper
project for the Chicaga Tribune tower
competition, 1922: an unportant
transitional building in the evolution
af Berlin architecture away from
Expressionism, tt was also the only
Tribune competition entry that
picked up the structural module of
the existing printing works at the
back of the offices.

108. Mies van der Rohe. Project fora
concrete office block, 1gzz: in spite
of the quasi-Expressionist outward
stepping of the floors, the dominantly
horizontal canception marks the
entry of the second phase in Berlin
architecture.

—
a
2777

- F
i yet Se,
“Se SS

Eee ke ee ir

ij
TF: /7

a1
bow fi
fas j
=
Fi-:

_

i

ae

Too

z

tog, 116, Mies van der Rohe. Project fora
brick viila, 1923: one of Mies’s most
celebrated conceptions, spreading into the
surrounding space like one of Lissitsky's
‘Prouns’.

Trt, 112, 143. Mies van der Rohe.

Wolf House, Gruben, 1926: Monument
to Karl Lichknecht and Rosa
Luxemburg, Bertin, 1920; Lange House,
Krefeld, rgz8: the evolution of a brick
architecture from Dotch detailing and
Expressionist roughness towards a
studied purity relying on the richness of
the materials employed.


114, Bruno Taut. 'Gehag’ housing, Berlin-Britz, 1927: fow cost mass-housing
of the sort that established the unique character and standing of the Berlin
school.

115. Mies van der Rohe. Block-model of housing and landscaping at the
Weissenhof-Siedlung, (925: town planning sven as a sculptural continuum.


116. Mies van der Rohe, Block of flats,
Wreissenhut-Siedlung, Stuttvact, 1927:
an exterior huilding-envelope of perfect
repularity contealing a nuniber of
dilferently-arranged flats.

17%, 18. Houhaus ‘Vorkurs’, Sniahes
of pictorial composition and collages of
various materials, executed under
Johannes [tten: in spite of his
Expressionist tendencies, Ltten’s use af
technitzes like collage prepared the way ff
fur Eater developments in the Vorkurs.

. .
.
Le
—mer se
a

rrg, 120. Paul Klee.
Ideal Menage Lily, 1920,
and Zinunerperspehiive,
1gzc: Klee’s drawings,
though created outside
the Elementarist
tradition, and seeming
sometimes to satirize its
mechanolatry (Ideal
Menage), atill suggest a
very similgr conception
of space to that of, say,
Moholy-Nagy (fig. 126).


i

“uiod AL, apsurs
Aut Woy paltiodidde
Aljay aq aouuea sau)
JE) PUNNS ayd Lo
pasodsrp os 'suon3ury
AnQeauedsoy un
yim (15 “By

aos ‘We]d 209) sy304q
sunetwuadrayu

7o xapdiuas yp 'of6t
Jaye mun Aajenb
Pure o218 WE Paypeaisuty
quaLUSAGLY

aspolA ays Jo agaid
“13482810 duty adios
3524 94): 9z61
nested] ‘sforpymg
Sneynngy Jasayy
wenidese, teri ‘iz:

""" qupwspqggnm

‘s8urppng
sTIEYNeg

#4) JO apeos ayy
{paaoxa 10 “‘jEAL

03 JUPUAAOTA]
Luapoyy ayy

jo sqiom Areiod
“We? Aue

al} atom A10}LI3}
ISTAIORIISU07Z
~]SLE]UALIA]y

aug fo SALISI] Ea ayi
LUG SHtOm OAK
asarp : Of61-gz6r
‘AaqUIBLY ‘alTUa7)
Anenpuy 3431]
3IB1G ‘348 y
PUE AGTUYEIaG
pus ‘éz61 ‘wep
-Iaey ‘Auoqaey
FAK, URA JO F56]4]
urepa “(WEG WEYY
Wouasap) LENEA
Jap Uva DUE URL
-yDUEg “Fer ‘Ez

iinet ot ail, ee SS a ee

iit hee ee eo ne oe
teint ak t) Tee Ta Ld tT

M. _ eae intent ae ee! na, Ee A
, a ee Pes 48

ihn Ae a eee Pe ee

~~ om om wee

et Ee Sg
oe ch 2 ee
one ee) | teres ee
ee

Toe eee ee
7 me GS EME mi

“— nH OE L |
i ears
| \ -
ai 1 ‘ w. i
* 61 ' -
40 1 it AP ee ee,
| 7 Mgr nn be a
| 48k 4 tie. Oa. Ld 5

ie | te ' '

en a |

tas, View of New York (the Gravbar Suilding) from

Brune Taut, Ore Neve Hanéanst: chroupghout the
"Pwentics, the U.S.A. contininal toooier Europeans,

and especially (serman Writers, an iniage af the

Futurist city made reak

= - en . .. j
‘Vantius . . AY rereag ee sega’
be uP all
me - A an ate mn"

i
wena
|

|

+ PbbE hE
L

va

ete LL oe

\} TT
MN

By
i

pit oa FI

it

wr

Mth eee
1

2°!
y

qu
mn
i

boagk de

F
1

-

TLL

saad

eT
ie

ee ee oe raga 3 ‘

. ae
sreaWea CUE ~ i Lo. - " ven

4

126. Airshaft of a ship, from
Moholy-Nagy, Vana Material zu
Architektur, 1928: Moholy, like Le
Corbusier, goes te engineering for
demonstration of his thearies—here,
the creation of ‘functional’ space,
125. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Enamel,

—— 1922: one of three versions of a
painting ordered and ‘pamted" bv
telephone in Berlin; like Duchamp's
‘Ready-macdes’, an extreme gesture
tuwards mechanized art.


— - — re Oy FO souared vary wep saw peLel Gy “ABOREp ad Jo Sorasas ay te kya

-odl ayn foxes py uO “UOrIpRAy Ley uadtaPy ous Ja KONPoOsd payearysrudos youl
a4) JO SUG: REG L “AnyarYyoLE nz fetdajopy uo,4 ‘Ades|-Ajoyopy way Auuado assay g71

Lo Wee Mlb ep 2f)4 Wet Oa ‘a

voy ey
teem rary
Lic bi te LD
Le bel]
vamrap swam
pe
Sh meus em,
wee ere
[ileal Mel et
fT ke ee

Perea aediy

‘t

Sei ee |

— Oe te ee i . —_—_ ao
- ™ qe aa ben Ane

sem in meter Ue 0


"PAsyeg pup yaa ‘aapysag

'dnod-1) dt 'Syae sways ayy Yano

OR WE] ITY} sueripwly dn Auroyped ‘apis
PERCH EUITU 3p) JO Opis UELUIoL ou) Atiopun
78) Samod AUislpaceets Pu sayy rssod

SUD JeF LOT LLILL Ys 'hzol RUC AdI BE]

“LACH IECELN SY [RL EP DN aE tee
AY] FT UOUTAN YY “ALOR Lap uty saya cobs 'GzE


137,132, 133. Le Corbusier and
Vierre Jeanneret. Les Tfeures Clasres,
Poissy-sur-Seine, 1928—-1p3e0: the
summation of the Latin stream in
the International style—a post-
Futurist villa, planned araund a
central ramp, raised on stilts for
vehicle circulation, and set down, a
pure gesthetic object, in an abstract
landscape.


134. Richard Buckminster Fuller. *‘Dymaxion’ house
project, 1927-1930: conceived at the time that the
international sryie was crystallising into a set of forms
symbolising the Machine Age, this project for a house
of light metals and plastic, planned radially around a
core of mechanical services, established a radical
technological criticism of the International style as
mechanically inadequate.

21: Germany: the encyclopaedics

THE ATMOSPHERE OF 1927 is best given by a book-title that could hardly
have been imagined a year earhier—Der Steg des neuen Baustils, Walter
Curt Behrendt's contribution to the body of literature on Modern architec-
ture that is explanatory rather than propagandist in aim, though even he fell
victim to an old-established exasperation of the propagandists

When will clients finaily realise the spiritual discrepancy between their Louia

Seize interiors and their Rolls-Royce cara?

But the victory of the new architecture was real and international—
sufficiently so for 1928 to witness the first attacks on it as an ‘International
Style’, for in that year Alexander von Senger published his Krisis der
Architektur, directed against Modern architecture as a whole, but based
entirely on quotations from Le Corbusier’s books and from L'Esprit
Neuveau, which is described as

. +. this neo-Jacobin review, Le Corbusier's organ, the synthesis of Russian,

German and Austrian tendencies, is furthermore, nothing but a disguised

Bolshevik propaganda magazine.

The mainstream of Modern architecture had found its International Style,
and so had its opponents, for whom von Senger’s tone and tactics were to
become the norm. But the attitude of the numerous German books that
appeared after Weissenhof is not defensive, and their aim is to consolidate
the victory of the new style by effecting broad surveys of its materials, its
history, its aesthetics. In this! context, Ludwig Hilberseimer stands out
for his industry, if for no other reason, and is one of the most charac-
teristic figures of the epoch. His career, to this date, had not been outstand-
ingly busy or successful in architecture, but now, under the aegis of Hannes
Meyer, he founded a town-planning department at the Bauhaus, and in two
years produced four books that give a remarkably full coverage of the
Modern Movement as it then understood itself,

In one of them he surveyed the new architecture as a movement covering
mest of Europe, Internationale Neue Baukunst, which illustrated the work
of some seventy European architects (and four Americans), and proved his
judgement to be remarkably sure—vyery few of the architects whose work

he included have subsequently dropped out of professional esteem, and
in at feast one case—that of Sant’ Eha—subsequent re-appraisals have fully
justified his inclusion. Some of his other choices have proven almost
clairvoyant: Aiberto Sartoris and the Figini-Pollini partnership had hardly
a building to their credit at the time that Hilberseimer’s book was written.

Two of the other books he wrote at this time were surveys of particular
building types—using that term fairly loosely, to cover both Hallenbauten,
which dealt with auditoria, markets, etc. and Gresstadi-~Architektur which
surveyed public and semi-public buildings of a metropolitan scale. His
fourth book, and the most interesting of this group, deals with a particular
material, concrete.

Its title, Beton als Gestalter, gives a false impression of it, and suggests
that it belongs to a current of thought which was becoming increasingly
prevalent at this time, tending to interpret the International Style in purely
Rationalist terms, as the product of the materials and techniques employed.
Lissitsky may well have started this tendency in German-speaking circles,
for Hannes Meyer who took it into the Bauhaus had come under his in-
fluence, and it is noteworthy that the young Italian architects who formed
the like-thinking Mocitmento Italiano per l' Architettura Razionaie had also
come under Constructivist influence. It is also noteworthy that they were
not anti-Traditionalists, and this neo-Rationalist movement in general
found considerable reinforcement in the past, as in such studies of the
nineteenth century as Giedion's Bauen in Frankreich, which will be dis-
cussed later,

But Berlin played no great part in this development, which was largely
the work of ‘provincials’ from Switzerland, Italy, and the Anglo-Saxon
countries, Though Berlin writers had plenty to say about the new materials
at this time their tone was not Rationalistic, Thus, in Gias im Bau und
als Gebrauchsgegenstand, Artur Korn, whose architecture at this time had
taken a very tough, almost CG, quality, nevertheless writes of glass in an
almost poetic tone, laying particular stress on its aesthetic qualities. Indeed,
his book begins with an almost Scheerbartian apotheosis of mediaeval
stained glass, and then goes on

Nothing has been lost of the riches of these earlier creations, but it has been

reworked in new materials for new functions, A new world of glass has been

opened that concedes nothing to the windows of the Gothic world in beauty.

But we have secured a great advance over them . . . in making an independent

glass skin. No more wali and window, even though the window mpght be the

dominant part-—this window is the wal! itself, this wail is itself the window.

And therewith a development is consummated, something absolutely new over

and above al} that the past can show: the denial of the outer wall that for

thousands of years had to be made of solid materials—stone, wood or some-
thing similar. in this new dispensation the outer wail no tonger makes itself

VISIBLE.

The intericr spatial depths, the form-giving structural frame are in evidence,

appearing through the glass wall which itself is only hinted at, only barely to
be appreciated through reflected light, distortion and mirror effects.


And therewith appears the truly unique quality of glass compared to all materiela

hitherto in use: It is there and it is not there.

It is the great mystery membrane, delicate and strong at the same tire.

The words ‘there and not there’ are to be interpreted in more than one
sense, for he cites exarmples of transparency (the Bauhaus), reflectivity
(Mies’s glass towers) and of the use of non-reflecting glass as an invisible
barrier against the weather (a shop designed by himself and his partner
Konrad Weitzmann). But his attitude, if poetically inclined, remains
practical: he does not philosophise.

Hilberseimer does; and the introduction to Beten als Gestalter is a
reflective essay on the relationship of architecture as an art to sctence and
technology. His opening paragraph rejects at once both the Rationalist
determinism of the nineteenth century and the science-as-spiritualisation
of de Styl

The scientific spirit of the nineteenth century had for its ultimate goal the con-
quest of the forces of nature. The rapid perfection of scientific methods of re-
search and their technical aids led in every field to unexpected results and
caused, for a whole epoch, an over-estimation of the possibilities of technology.
The dangers that lurked here for the Getsteswissenschaften, through the connec-
tion of material conclusions with immaterial conceptions—these dangers can
fortunately be avoided with the disciplines grouped as ‘Technology’. The dis-
coveries and inventions in this provmee can be compared directly with reality,
and be corrected accordingly
This separation of the spiritual sciences from physical science and techno-
logy is remarkable for the time at which it was written, but-—since he
clearly includes aesthetics among the spiritual sciences—it also involves
him in some rather perilous reasoning. Having defined the relationship of

technique and architecture thus

.. + that technique ia never more than a means for the art of building, that
technique and art are profoundly different,

after having pratsed enginéers for perfecting concrete construction

unrestricted by aesthetic preconceptions and free from nostalgia for things cut-

side their technique,
he is in a strong position in discussing the quality of buildings where con-
scious aesthetic intention is apparent, but badly placed where it is not.
Thus, he is well placed to castigate Auguste Perret and Martin Elsasser for
dressing up their concrete in period style, or Rietveld who is blamed for
indulging in Konsivuétivismrus and artistisches Spiel, those who disguise the
economical aims of reinforced concrete construction with gratuitous mass,
and even Goitfried Semper

who wished to hear of iron used only to increase the tensile strength of masa
construction

and not as 2 visible architectural element in its own right,
But he is badly placed to evaluate a class of buildings that have had

peculiar standing in the eyes of Modernists ever since Muthesius-—en-
gineering structures.
if we categorise constructions and projects conceived in the spirit of reinforced
concrete construction as architecture, then the aesthetic rules connected with
and derived from stone building will no longer serve. For anew sense of space haa
become effective, a new relationship of support end load that has radically
affected the optical aspect of buildings.
Out of mental convenience all this haa been given out as ‘Neue Sachlichkeit’ or
simply technology, without, to be sure, anyone having any standards for where
technique leaves off and creativity begins. Certainly, purely technical constroc-
tion is still not architecture, but even in the field of so-called technological
building it would still be difficult ta draw a line betweer: the creative and the
uncreative, And besides, many of these buildings are of an astonishing architec-
tonic quality, powerful originality and primitive architectural feeling,
He offers no solution to this dilemma, except possibly a marginal reference
to the concept of Etnheit von Aussen- und Innendau as a key to the new
architecture, but his closing paragraph suggests that he has little faith in
any deductive formulation of rules of judgement.

Aristotle justly observed that art runs ahead of its theories, The creator is intuitive

—the work comes spontaneously from his hands according to its own rules.

Ali science, all research, all perception cannot replace the naive certamty of the

artist. The new therefore can be judged neither by the old rules nor by these

deduced rules... .

Such reasonable doubt, anti-Rationalist but not irrational, seems not to
have been shared by those who, in the same two or three years sought to
fix the position of the Modern Movement in history. Either they did not
recognise the emergence of a specifically new architecture, and gave blanket
treatment to all Twentieth-century architecture, progressive or otherwise,
Gr, alternatively, they recognised 2 new architecture, but saw it as a con-
tinuation of the Rationalist tradition of the previous century. The first
attitude made it possible to bring Modern architecture within the scope
of existing series of art-historical publications—three volumes of the
Blauen Biicher edited by Walter Miiller-Wulckow and dealing with
Factories, Housing, and Public Buildings respectively, put Modern Ger-
man architecture into an established semi-popular series of picture-books,
while Gustav Platz’s compendious Die Baukunst der neuesten Zeit elevated
it to the level of the Propylaen-Verlag, and thus to the highest levels of
commerica] art-historica] publishing.

Works that recognised the emergence of a new architecture but linked
it back exclusively to restricted aspects of the nineteenth century also
appeared at both the popular and specialist levels. The most influential of
the former class was undoubtedly Bruno Taut’s Modern Architecture,
which appeared in a German edition as Die Neue Baukuast in Europa und
Amerika in the same year (1929). The German edition was scantily provided
with plans and sections, the English edition was entirely innocent of them,
but this, on Gropius’s word, was apparently considered proper to works
intended for a wide readership. However, the book has some subsidiary

|

a eS LS

interests besides the overriding one of being the first large popular work
on the Modern Movement to appear in English. It gave importance to the
work of the Expressionists! and of the Amsterdam School at a time when
their reputations were declining, and its attitude to America is fairly typi-
cal of a general tendency of the time.

During the Twenties the attention of German architects began to wander
from the work of Wright, to which it had been directed by Berlage and
the Wasmuth publications, to the other America, the skyscraper America
admired by the Futurists and Le Corbusier. Taut’s attention has not
wandered very far, only to a handful of New York buildings, such as the
Graybar Building (seen in a purely Futurist context with the elevated
railway cutting across its base) and the grain silos that had already been
canonised by the Ingenteurbauten tradition, but other German architectural
observers had been almost completely diverted. Both Mendelsohn and
Richard Neutra had gone to the USA with the intention (or at least the
main intention} of meeting Wright and Sullivan, but in Mendelsohn’s
Amerika and Russland Europa Amerika it is the skyscraper image that
dominates and in Neutra’s Wie baut Amerika? it is the techniques of sky-
scraper building in steel that occupy his attention.

But Jodern Architecture also puts the new style firmly in a line of descent
from a few selected aspects of nineteenth-century design, even to the ex-
tent of pronouncing that

With the outbreak of the War, the history of Modern architecture may be con-

sidered closed
and, quite consistently with this view, he pays no attention to the Cubist,
Futurist and Abstractionist Movements that had helped to forge the formal
language that he himself was using by this time. In this, however, he was
supported, influenced even, by a book from which some of his illustrations
were taken, a book that has had a wide and curious influence on the Modern
Mavement’s view of its own history—-Bauen m1 Frankreich; Etsen, Fisen-
beton, by Sigfried Giedion. The title suggests the book’s aim quite con-
cisely-—to systematise and bring up to date the view of nineteenth-century
engineering construction advanced by Muthesius and by Meyer in the early
years of the century, by including the reinforced concrete work done under
the aegis of Perret and Freyssinet since their time. It is mportant because
it helped to give the International Style a sense of international ancestry
but it did so in a biased manner. The commitment of the book is to the
Rationalist side, but the author was also an art historian trained under
Wolfflin. His art-historical training tends to make him assume that things
that look alike must have some historical connection: his Rationalist inclina-
tion, however, tends to make him overlook purely aesthetic determinants

‘Traut pays tribute particularly to Olbrich, August Endell, and Poelzig but—

in apite of devoting half a page and two ilustrations to the Glass Pavilion at Cologne
-—he is completely silent on Scheerbart,

of style, and between the two, a whole section of the history of Modern
architecture is mislaid. Yet there is much about the book that commands
TESPECt.

His estimate of the historian’s position in the relativistic world of
twentieth-century thought is commendably honest.

The historian too stands in time, not above it, He has fost his pedestal in
eternity, ...

Past present and future are for us an uninterruptible process. However, we do
not live backwards but forwards, Though the past strengthens us with the assur-
ance that our wills are not lirnited and mdividual, the future, come what may,
appears of greater consequence to us.

Out of these concepts of a responsibility to the developing present, of the
imperturbable continuity of history, and of a corporate will (or Zeitgetst) he
evolves an attitude that inexorably condemns him to an incomplete view
of the rise of the International Style.

The task of the historian is to recognise beginnings and—despite all the debris
that overlays them—to bring out the continuity of development . . . cut of the
vast complexity of a past period to expose those elements that became points of
departure for the future.

As will be seen, these two last statements give a programme with a strong
element of parti-pris in it. Any historian is lable to view the past according
to the preoccupations of his own time, but Giedion makes this a deliberate,
not accidental, approach and the emphasis on continuity leaves him at
liberty to overlook anything that he does not wish to deal with, as being
mere ‘débris’.
Ais a result, the history of iron and reinforced concrete is discussed
primarily from the viewpoint of one who had only ‘discovered’ Modern
architecture four years before he began to write this book, at the time of the
Bauhauswoche of 1923, and had taken over the preoccupations of the times
as if they were the preoccupations of the whole Movement. He makes direct
comparisons of nineteenth-century engimeermg structure and twentieth-
century architecture, frequently reinforcing them with massive black
arrows. Free-standing columns in the Reserve of Labrouste's Bibliotheque
St Genevidve are confronted with free-standing columns in Le Corbusier’s
Matson Cook; the frame structure of Saulnier’s Chocolat Menser factory
is confronted with the frame of Mies van der Rohe’s Weissenhof flats; the
glazed walling of E/iffel’s Grande Galerte for the 1878 Exposition in Paris
with the glazed walling of the Bauhaus; and the lifts of the Eiffel Tower
with the suspended railways of Mart Stam’s scheme for the redevelopment
of the Rokin. To these comparisons are added an apotheosis of the Ecole
Polytechnique as one of the ultimate sources of the new architecture, and
a list of ‘prophetic’ quotations from Théophile Gautier, Anatole de Baudot,
César Daly, Octave Mirbeau and others—texts from holy writ that Le

Corbusier was quick to employ in his own defence during the wrangles
over the League of Nations competition.

Much of this had involved solid, if indiscriminate, research work and
uninhibited revaluations of familiar structures Hke the Eiffel Tower, but
conspicuously missing from the argument is the ‘débris’ that had accumu-
lated since and made things like free-standing columns and glazed walling
of importance to architects, the whote revolution in architectural theary
that had been going on from 1908 and was barely completed two decades
later when Bauen in Frankreich was published. Yet the text of the book
reveals at many points that Giedion’s own viewpoint was largely shaped
by that revolution: the caption, headed Umgestaltung der Erdoberfldche,
to a picture of industrial landscape outside Marseilles shows a Futurist
interest in multi-level circulation and Sant’Elia’s ‘reordering the
eatth’s crust’; he refers to Konstrukitvismus in the nineteenth century,
and at one point he uses a phrase whose extraction is manifestly Doesbur-
pian:

die Elemente fiir eine kollektive Gestaltung schaffen.

While, clearly, Giedion’s terms of reference did not necessarily require him
to recognise every beginning, and while he has subsequently repaired the
omission in his later book Space Tire and Architecture, the absence of the
theoretical and aesthetic “débris’ from Bauen in Frankreich has given most
of its readers the impression that the International Style is directly de-
scended from the Grands Constructeurs of the nineteenth century, and is
purely Rational and Functional in its approach. Such an idea was symipa-
thetic to many architects at the time, and it was of particular usefulness to
apologists of the style in Anglo-Saxon countries where, despite the efforts
of Geoffrey Scott, firmly established Ruskinian prejudices made argument
from moral, rather than aesthetic grounds, more effective. Yet, by a fortunate
historical irony, when men in those countries set out to train young archi-
tects in the supposedly Functionalist disciplines of the new architecture,
the only pedagogic textbook available to them, the book that made the
Bauhaus method available to the world, was almost exactly opposite in
bias, was sophisticated on just those subjects where Giedion was naive, and
by a further historical irony, was the work of the typographer of Bauen in
Frankreich, Moholy-Nagy.

At first sight there might appear to be a more than superficial connection
between the two books—Moheoly has a warrn footnote reference to Bauen
in Frankreich, and the title of his Book, Yon Material zu Architektur might
suggest that this too is a work of the Rationalist persuasion. In fact, the
von .. , at does little more than indicate the order in which the subject-
matter of the book is tackled, but this tithe may well have been chosen with
one eye on the way advanced architectural opinion was running, since It
was originally promised as Yon Kunst 2u Leben, and republished in English

as The New Viston late in the Nineteen-thirties when the tide of opinion
had changed again. This last title was, im any case, the truest, for what
Moholy sets out is something that Le Corbusier might have termed a
formation de [optique moderne. It is almost exclusively concerned with
visual and formal problems, and deals with them in a resolutely Modern
raanner, its examples, precepts and standards being drawn almost entirely
from within the Modern Movement itself.

In this it reflects a great deal of its author's personality and background,
Born in 1898, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy was a clear decade younger than the
pioneers in either architecture or the plastic arts, and grew up in a worldin
which Modern art existed already. His carly imagination was coloured by an
agency that had come into the world at about the same time as himself, the
illustrated magazines, to such an extent that he was overcome with dis-
appointment on finding that Szeged, the nearest town of any size to his
boyhead home in Hungary, had no skyscrapers. An injury received a few
months after that which carried off Sant’Elia, and in the same battle zone
though on the other side, kept him out of most of the later fighting in the
War, and pave him time to investigate Modern art, although his formal
training, like Marinetti’s, was in law. By the time he arrtved in Berlin, early
In 1921, starving but a little ahead of other Abstractionists from Eastern
Europe, he had undergone the education of a Modernist, revolutions and
all, in compressed form.

Although he kept up his Hungarian connections, and represented the
Hungarian, expatriate AZA-Gruppe at the various congresses (Weimar
Disseldorf, etc.) of the period, he was soon deeply involved in the turbulent
artistic culture of Berlin, His authorship of the Aufruf sur Elementaren
Kunst has already been mentioned, and he was in touch with Lissitsky
from the time of the latter’s arrival, also with Gabo, Schwitters and Arp,
with the Stijland Sturm connections. But once a certain amount of Futurist
thetoric had been worked out of his system, his devotion was almost
exclusively to the Russian connection, and from some point in 1921 on-
wards, his work depends on Malevitsch’s Suprematist elements of circle,
cross and square, at least for its point of departure, often for ita entire
formal repertoire, From a slightly earlier date he had begun to interest
himself in ‘Modern’ techniques like collage, and ‘Modern’ materials like
transparent plastics, not merely because they were new but because 2
consuming interest in light, as the ultimate malerische Element, felt by
other young painters beside himself, could not be satisfied with traditional
means,

However, his most spectacular excursion into Modern methods had quite
another stimulus, and quite a different import, and must rank with Du-
champ’s ‘Bottle-rack’ as a major gesture towards a revision of the relation-
ship between artist, subject, and public in a mechanised society. At his one
man show at the Sturm gallery in 1922, Moholy exhibited a group of Ele-

mentarist compositions including three of identical design but differing size,
of whose creation he gives the following account?

. in 1922 I ordered by telephone from a sign factory five paintings in por-
celain enamel. I had the factory's colour chart before me and I sketched my
paintings on graph-paper. At the other end of the telephone the factory super-
visor had the same kind of paper divided into squares. He took down the dic-
tated shapes in the correct position.

This intrusion of a whole industrial organisation and a telephone service
into the accepted conventions of artistic creation has clearly the same kind
of Dadaist significance as Duchamp’s elimination of artist and painting
from those conventions with the ‘Bottle-rack’, though Moholy was, ap-
parently, more conscious of the positive aspects of his action and the
claims they made for the status of mechanical methods. And where Du-
champ’s apologists tended to explain his intentions in a platonic sense,
Mcholy was prepared to do this for himself—his esteem of the Phileban
solids has been noted, and apropos the ‘telephone paintings’ he later wrote

But my betief is that mathematically harmonious shapes, executed precisely,

are filled with emotional quality, and they represent the perfect balance be-

tween feeling and intellect.
If, as seems possible, he felt this way at the time that these paintings were
executed, then they are not to be categorised with the tough-minded arte-
facts of the G connection—indeed, that party in Berlin seems to have
regarded Moholy’s Vorkurs at the Bauhaus as being just as deplorably
‘arty’ as Itten’s.

Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the first task assigned to him when
he joined the Bauhaus in 1923 was the reform of the metal-working shop,
which suggests that he was regarded as particularly equipped for techniques
and materials of that kind, and he only took over the Forkurs later in the
same year, in collaboration with Josef Albers, who had been allotted to the
preliminary course a little earlier. Exactly how much of the Vorkurs, as it
found its way into Von Material zu Architektur, is due to Albers and how
much to Moholy is now difficult to assess, but it is clear that the latter
soon became the dominant personality, and net only in the Vorkurs, for he
seems to have risen rapidly to a position of eminence second only to that
of Gropius as an exponent of Bauhaus ideas and a shaper of Bauhaus policy.
Thus, although the editorship of the Bauhausbiicher was ostensibly shared
by himself and Gropius, the titles and authors represent so closely his own
synicretic interests that one may suspect that they were largely his own
choice—as if he wished all the Bauhaus public to have the same broad
ground in the modern '-isms’ as himself.

Such a wish clearly underlies, in part, the organisation of the subject-
matter of Von Material zu Architektur. Though Moholy disclaims that it

* This account of the telephone paintings ia taken from the autobiographical

fragment Abstract of an Artist, which appeared as a supplement to the second
American edition of The New Vision {New York, 1949).

is ‘lexikalisch’ in its treatrnent of materials and methods, it is encyclopaedic
in its coverage of the Modern Movement, and illustrates, apart from
Bauhaus products, works by Schwitters, Marinetti, Picasso, Brancusi,
Archipenko, Barlach, Belling, Pevaner, Schlemmer, Vantongerloo, Serv-
ranckx, Rodin, Rodchenko, Cocteau, Gabo, Lipchitz, Le Corbusier, Star,
and Eiffel. I¢ also discusses at less or greater length the following move-
ments: Abstraction, Dadaism, Futurism, Constructivism, Tactilism, merz-
bid, Cubism, neo-Plasticism, Realism, Surrealism, Purism, Pointillism,
and Impressionism, and the following extensions of the visual culture of
educated Europeans: photegraphy, microphotography, crystallography,
kinetic sculpture, films, iJluminated advertising, montage and primitive art.

This wide-ranging visual erudition and sharp appreciation of the environ-
ment of urban living are difficult to parallel, except possibly in the art and
writings of Boccioni, but Moholy has the advantage ever Beccioni in his
ability to draw this mass of information and experience into a quite com-
pact and orderly body of theory—the first orderly body of theory to be
drawn out of, rather than put inte, the Modern Movement. The first im-
pression pained on reading the book is that for Mohely art started in rgoo.
There are a few references to the art of the past—the Pyramids and the
Kaaba at Mecca to make a point about Phileban forms, a Leonardo and a
Giambcologna to make another point about sculpture—but his view does not
really extend back beyond the Eiffel Tower. He harks back to neither the
geometry of Greece, nor the masonry of the Middle Ages, he is not inter-
ested in temples and cathedrals, his theories are to derive their authority
from the present condition of culture, net from history.

The first part of the book is accordingly devoted to a discussion of the
relationships between individuals, their mechanised environment, and the
process of education, The line of argument was, by 1928, an established
Bauhaus thesis, concerning the need to educate complete personalities not
narrow specialists, and the flavour of the discussion is adequately given by
some of the paragraph-headings

The future needs the whole man

Nat agaist technology, but with it

Man, not the product, is the sim

Everybody is talented

The responsibility for putting this inta effect lies with afl of us

Utopia?
Education has a great task to fulfil here

and this task of education is outlined thus

We need Utopians of genius, a new Jules Verne; not to sketch in broad perspec-
tive an easily grasped technical utopia, but the very existence of future men
whose basic laws of being respond to instinctive simplicity as well as the com-
plicated relationships of life,

Our educators have the task of ordering development towards the healthy exer-
cise of our powers, to jay the foundations of a balanced life even im the earliest
atage of training.

He then pays tribute to the educational pioneers whose work preceded the
Bauhaus—a register of names and movements that is a history in itself,
and the concluding paragraphs of section I seek to fix the place of the
Bauhaus in this picture of society, culture and education—and to explain
once more the reasons for handicraft training in a mechanised society.

Whatever the educational method outlined in the other three sections of
Von Material 2u Architektur may owe ta the pioneers whom Moholy had
listed in the first section, it has three very clear “debts to sources nearer
home: To Itten’s original Vorkurs, to Klee and Kandinsky, and to Male-
vitsch. The debt to Itten is clear and fundamental—the ernphasis on learn-
ing by doing and on the nature of materials. Moholy's original contribution
here is in changing over from the idea of an intuitive grasp of the ‘inner
nature’ of materials to an objective, physical assessment of their ascertarn-
able properties of texture, strength, flexibility, transparency, workability, etc,

The debt to Klee and Kandinsky lies in the von ... zu organisation of the
book. Both of their Baukausbiicher had started from a consideration of
points, and proceeded from them to lines and thus to planes, at which
level Kandinsky leaves off, though Klee goes on to volume and space. In
Moholy’s non-draughtsmanly view, point and line were simply aspects of
planes, which he would call surfaces, but from that level onwards he pro-
ceeds in step with Klee, albeit handling ideas in a manner that was utterly
different in every way from that of the Pddagogisches Skizzenbuch. Male-
vitsch is his predecessor in visual erudition, in close critical analyses of
Cubist paintings, and in emphasis on such things as the views dewn from,
and up to, aeroplanes.

The first point in which Moholy transcends all his predecessors is in his
phenomenal command of the non-artistic visual experiences of his time.
Words cannot convey the impact made on the eye by the original edition of
this book, its eraphatic typography, its businesslike layout, and the range of
its illustrations, from neat diagrams and models of Bauhaus equipment,
through reproductions of original works of art, and scientific documentary
photographs, to extraordinary agency pictures of such things as dumps of
old motor-tyres, airships, sporting events, street-scenes, film sets, and a
celebrated sequence, illustrating a point about texture, of a cat’s fur in
negative, an old man’s skin and a mouldy apple. Brought up on illustrated
magazines, Moholy communicates in this book something of the visual
richness of a magazine-culture and brings tt to bear upon the problem of
visual education. For these images, however striking in their own right or
in juxtaposition are not, so to speak, a musée wraginaire,* they support and
explain the educational system that is expounded in the three main sections
of the book. Section II begins with the tactile qualities of materials, and

"Any more than are the illustrations—sometimes even more bizarre—in
Amedée Ozenfant’s almost exactly contemporary book The Foundations of Madern
Art,

illustrates the famous tactile-machines that were devised for their investi-
gation at the Bauhaus and then goes on to consider the cther aspects of the
surfaces of materiais that can be physically appreciated and physically
manipulated, culminating in the use of surfaces as a screen for the projec-
tion of patterns of light. Section TIT also culminates in the use of light, as
the ultimate means of creating sculptural volume, but the road that leads
to it is interesting for the way in which it shows his methodical mind at
work,

He begins with the ‘Block-like’, a term which includes any unmodelled or
unpierced solid of recognisable geometrical form. These recognisable forms
are, as might be expected, the Phileban solids, but later in the section he
produces an extended list of forms, in order to encompass also non-
Phileban solids encountered in science and technology.

Until a shart time ago, geometrical elements, such as the sphere, cone, cylinder,

cube, prism and pyramid, were taken as the foundation of sculpture. But

biotechnical elements have now been added....

These biotechnical elements formerly entered more particularly into techno-

fogy, where the functional approach called for maximum economy. Raoul

Francé has distinguished seven biotechnical elements: crystal, sphere, cone,

plate, strip, rod and spiral (screw); he says that these are the basic technical

elements of the whole world. They suffice for all its processes and are sufficient

te bring them to their optimum condition.‘
However, these extensions to the repertoire of regular forms occur some-
what later in the argument, after he has proceeded from pure blocks to
modelled blocks and thence to pierced blocks, from standing sculpture to
balanced and kinetic sculpture or mobiles, and just before he tackles the
problem of the creation of virtual volumes by the movement of lights in
space (fireworks, Uluminated advertising). By this point he is already
entangled with the subject of Section IV, Space, but before tackling space
he sets out, in a neat table, the Formiehre that has been covered so far

A general systematisation of the elements (of artistic creation) is based upon

the relations of

1. Known forms, such 4s
mathematical and geometrical shapes
biotechnical elements

2. New forrns, such as
free shapes

The production of new forms may be based on

1, relations of measurement {golden section and other proportions)
position (measurable itn angles)
movement (speed, direction, thrust, intersection, telescoping interlocking,
penetration, mutual interpenetration)

4 Just how short that time had been since these Phileban solids had been so highly
esteemed, may be judged by comparing this statement with Moholy’s letter to
Wilhelm ‘Wagenfeldt, quoted in the previous chapter.

* France, whose ideas had been discussed earlier in the book, was not, it seema,
an authority of standing in the field, but the author of works of popularisation on
scientific subjects.

ne

| a. differing aspects of material
; structure
texture
surface treatinent
massing
3. light (colour, optical illusions, reflected light, mirroring)
| The relationships of forms may become effective 2a
T, contrasts
2. deviations
3, variations
shifting and dislocation
repetition
rotation
mirror images
With this behind him, he turns to space, which for him is so much the
stuff of architecture that the terms are interchangeable. He sees the play
of space as the distinguishing characteristic of Modern architecture, so that
the possibility of confusion in nomenclature as between large sculpture
and small architecture which existed in older cultures when architecture
too was only the manipulation of volume, no longer exists. ‘The nature of
this space is defined by him in various ways—at the beginning of Section
IV he lists forty-four adjectives that have been used to describe aspects of
space, and then cites a minimum definition

and their combinations

Space is the relation between the position of bodies.

This scientific definition he will accept only as a point of departure, and
from it he approaches his subject on a number of Lines. Firstly, as an aspect
of functional organisation
The elements necessary to the fulfilment of the function of a building unite
in @ spatial creation that can become a spatial experience for us. The ordering
of space in this case is no more than the most economical union of planning
methods and human needs. The current programme of life plays an important
role in this, but does not entirely deterrnine the type of space created.
Visual justification of this concept of functional space is provided by a
view up an airshaft, in which the stairs and landings are all pierced to pro-
mote better air-flow, and at the same time create quite accidentally the kind
of play of space that would attract an Elementarist. Further explanation
can be found in the caption to another illustration.
The concept ‘facade’ ia already passing from architecture. No place remains in
buildings for that which is not adapted to some function: to the development of
the front (balconies, advertising) is added the exploitation of the roofs (garden
terraces, Janding grounds).
This last view of a building engaged functionally with the surrounding
space on every side is clearly Futurist, and there are further descriptions of
spatial manipulation which confirm that his attitude is both Elementarist
and Futurist in approach. On the Elementarist side

Out of cosmic space a ‘piece of space’ ig cut by meana of a, sometimes campli-

cated-seeming, network of limiting and interpenetrating strips, wires and sheets
of glazing, as if space were a divisible cormpact substance. Thus, moder archi-
tecture is founded en a full interpenetration with outer space

and on the Futurist side

The organisation of this space-creation will be accomplished thus: measurably,
by the limits of physical bodies, inumeasurably by dynamic fields of force, and
space-creation will be the confluence of ever-fluid spatial existences.
Though the last quotation is a very toned-down version of Boccioni’s
‘field theory’, most of the illustrations to this section thunder with Futurist
rhetoric, even to the extent of being faked to heighten the effect, as where a
flight of five Swedish seaplanes has been obviously collaged on to a view
of a muiti-level traffic intersection in San Diego, Calif.

No other document of the period gives so graphic or so encyclopaedic
a view of what the architect can do with space, but it is emphasised that he
does not work upon space as a private aesthetic game

The experience of apace is not a privilege of the pifted few, but 4 biological

function
and this brings in the most interesting aspect of Moholy’s view of space:
experienced space, and the linked cancept of ‘biological’.

We must acknowledge that in every respect, space is a reality of our sensory

experience.

Man becomes conscious of apace ., . first through the sense of sight.

The experience of the visual relations of bodies may be tested by movernent, by

changing one’s position, and by the sense of touch, Further possibilities for the

experience of space lic in the acoustical and balancing organs.

Much of the importance of this view hes in the way in which it inverts
earlier ideas on the subject. Just as he had inverted Itten's idea of the
‘inner nature’ of materials and replaced it by an emphasis cn their ascer-
tainable physical properties, so Moholy replaces the idea of space enter-
tained by say, Geoffrey Scott, as something affecting the inner nature of
man by a symbolic Linfttiéung, with the idea of space as something affecting
the sense organs of men by direct physical Ar/ebmes. Scott would have taken
the part played by the sense organs as a mere means to the greater end of
aesthetic experience, but for Moholy the mechanics are what matters, and
are the aesthetic experience itself.

Architecture—the ordering of space—is justified in Moholy’s eyes in so
far as it furthers the ascertainable biological needs of man, and where the
book has a weakness in the eyes of a reader of today is in never coming to
grips, in detail, with those needs. At the time at which it was woitten, they
could probably be taken for granted since the subject was in the air, at
Jeast in the negative sense of minimum standards of sanitation, daylighting,
floor-space, ventilation, etc. and anyone familiar with slums such as those
that were still being cleared at Frankfurt am Main, would know what
Moholy had in mind when he quoted the grausam wahren Spruch of the low-
life illustrator Heinrich Zille

You can kill a man with a building juat as easily as with an axe,

Even 50, the concept of ‘The Biological taken as the guide in everything’ ia
clear in general outline, and it leads him to a restatement of a principle
that tended to be overlooked in the Twenties
Today it is a question of nothing fess than the reconquest of the biological
fundamentals. Only then can the maximum use be made of technical advances

in physical culture, nutritional science, dwelling design and the organisation of
work

summed up in the slogan already quoted
Man, not the product, is the aim,

His attitude emerges as a kind of non-Determinist Functionalism, based
no longer on the bare logic of structural Rationalism, but upon the study
of man as a variable organism. ‘Though he probably accepted ideas tike Le
Corbusier's besoins-fype—Giedion’s use of the word Extstenzmintmion is
another of the same family—his system was built on more liberal founda-
tions than these, and was capable of interpretation and reinterpretation
in a wider context than that of the International Style. For this reason, if
for no other, it occupies the unexpected position of being at the same time
the first book entirely derived from the Modern Movement, and also one
of the first to point the way to the next steps forward.


22: Conclusion: Functionalism and Technology

BY THE MIDDLE of the Thirties it was already common practice to use the
word Functionalism, as a blanket term for the progressive architecture of
the Twenties and its canon of approved forerunners that had been set up
by writers like Sigfried Giedion, Yet, leaving the shortlived G episode in
Berlin on one side, it is doubtful wf the ideas implicit in Functionalism—
let alone the word itself—were ever significantly present in the minds of
any of the influential architects of the period, Scholiasts may care to dis-
pute the exact date on which this misleading word was first used as the label
for the International Style, but there is little doubt that the first conse-
quential use was in Alberto Sartoris’s book Gi Elements dell’architettura
Fyunsionale, which appeared in Milan in 1932. Responsibility for the term
is laid on Le Corbusier's shoulders—the work was originally to have been
called Architettura Raxionale, or something similar, but, in a letter which is
reprinted as a preface to the book, Le Corbusier wrote

The title of your book is limited: it is a real fault to he constrained to put the

word Rattonal on one side of the barricade, and leave only the word Academic

to be put on the other. Instead of Rational say functional, .. .
Most critics of the Thirties were perfectly happy te make this substitution
of words, but not of ideas, and Functional has, almost without excep-
tion been interpreted in the limited sense that Le Corbusier attributed to
Retional, a tendency which culminated in the revival of a nineteenth-
century determinism such as both Le Corbusier and Gropius had rejected,
summed up in Louis Sullivan’s empty jingle

Form follows function

Functionalism, as a creed or programme, may have a certain austere
nobility, but it is poverty-stricken symbolically. The architecture of the
Twenties, though capable of its own austerity and nobility, was heavily,
and designediy, loaded with symbolic meanings that were discarded or
ignored by its apologists in the Thirties. Two main reasons emerge for this
decision to fight on a narrowed front. Firstly, most of those apologists
came from outside the countries—Holland, Germany and France—that


—

eT ET

rs a re

had done most to create the new style, and came to it late. They thus
failed to participate in those exchanges of ideas, collisions of men and move-
ments, congresses and polemics, in which the main lines of thought and
practice were roughed out before 1925, and they were strangers to the local
conditions that coloured them. ‘Thus, Sigfried Giedion, Swiss, caught only
the tail end of this process in 1923; Sartoris, Italian, missed it almost com-
pletely, Lewis Mumford, American, in spite of his sociological percep-
tiveness, was too remotely placed to have any real sense of the aesthetic
issues involved—hence his largely irrelevant tergiversations on the problem
of monumentality.

The second reason for deciding to fight on the narrowed front was that
there was no longer any choice of whether or not to fight. With the Inter-
national Style outlawed politically in Germany and Russia, and crippled
economically in France, the style and its friends were fighting for a tochold
in politically-suspicious Fascist Italy, aesthetically-indifferent England,
and depression-stunned America. Under these circumstances it was better
to advocate or defend the new architecture on logical and economic grounds
than on grounds of aesthetics or syrmbolisms that might stir nothing but
hostility. This may have been good tactics—the point remains arguable—
but it was certainly misrepresentation. Emotion had played a much larger
part than logic in the creation of the style; inexpensive buildings had been
clothed in it, but it was no more an inherently economical style than any
other. ‘The true aim of the style had clearly been, to quote Gropius’s words
about the Bauhaus and its relation to the world of the Machine Age

... to invent and create forms symbolising that world.

and it is in respect of such symbolic forms that tts historical justification
must lie,

How far it had succeeded in its own terms in creating such terms, and in
carrying such symbolism, can best be judged by examining two buildings,
widely held to be masterpieces, and both designed in 1928. One of them is
the German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exhibition of 1929, a work of Mies
yan der Rohe, so purely symbolic in intention that the concept of Function-
alism would need to be stretched to the point of unrecognisability before it
could be made to fit it—the more so since it is not easy to formulate in
Rational terms precisely what it was intended to symbolise. A loose back-
ground, rather than a precise exposition, of the probable intentions can be
established from Mies’s pronouncements on exhibitions in 1928

The era of monumental expositions that make money is past, Today we judge

an exposition by what it accomplishes in the cultural field.

Economic, technical and cultural conditions have changed radicaily, Both tech-

nology and industry face entirely new problems. It is very important for our cul~

ture and our society, as weil as for technology and industry, to find good solutions.
German industry, and indeed European imdustry as a whole, must understand

and aclve these specific tasks. The path must lead from quantty towards
quality—from the extensive to the intensive,

Along this path industry and technology will join with the forces of thought
and culture.

We are in a period of transition—a transition that will change the world.

To explain and help along this transition will be the responsibility of future
expositions. ...

The ambiguities of these statements were resolved in the Pavilion by
architectural usages that tapped many sources of symbolism-—ar, at least
sources of architectural prestige. Attention has been drawn to echoes of
Wright, of de Sijjland Schinkelschiiler tradition, in the Pavilion, but its full
richness is only apparent when these references are rendered precise. All
three of these echoes are, in practice, summed up in a mode of occupying
space which is strictly Elementarist. Its horizontal planes, which have been
likened to Wright, and its scattered vertical surfaces, whose distribution
on plan has been referred to van Doesburg, mark out one of Moholy's
"pieces of space’ in such a way that a ‘full penetration with outer space’ is
effectively achieved. Further, the distribution of the columns which support
the roof slab without assistance from the vertical planes, is completely
regular and their spacing suggests the Elementarist concept of space as a
measurable continuum, irrespective of the objects it contains, And again,
the podium on which the whole structure stands, in which Philip Johnson
has found ‘a touch of Schinkel’, extending on one side a good way beyond
the area covered by the roof slab, is also a composition in its own right in
plan because of the two pools iet into it, and thus resembles the patterned
base-boards which form an active part in those Abstract studies of volu-
metric relations that came from the Ladowski-Lissitsky circle, and, like
them, appears to symbolise ‘infinite space’ as an active component of the
whole desiga.

To this last effect the materials aiso contribute, since the marble floor of
the podium, everywhere visible, or at least appreciable even where covered
by carpeting, emphasises the spatial continuity of the complete scheme.
But this marble, and the marbling of the walls, has another level of mean-
ing—the feeling of luxury it imparts sustains the idea of transition from
quantity to quality of which Mies had spoken, and introduces further para-
doxical echoes of both Berlage and Loos. These walls are space-creators,
in Berlage’s sense and have been ‘let alone from floor to cornice’ in the
manner that Berlage admired in Wright, yet, if it be objected that the sheets
of marble or onyx with which they are faced are ‘decoration hung on them’
such as Berlage disapproved, one could properly counter that Adolf Loos,
the enemy of decoration, was prepared to admit large areas of strongly
patterned marble as wall-cladding in his interiors.

The continuity of the space is further demonstrated by the transparency
of the glass walls that occur in various parts of the scheme, so that a visitor's
eye might pass from space to space even where his foot could not. On the
other hand the glass was tinted so that its materiality could also be appre-
ciated, in the manner of Artur Korn’s There and not There paradox, The

giase of these walls is carried in chromium glazing bars, and the chromium
surface is repeated on the coverings of the cruciform columns. This con-
frontation of rich modern materials with the rich ancient material of the
marble is a manifestation of that tradition of the parity of artistic and anti-
artistic materials that runs back through Dadaism and Futurism to the
papiers coliés of the Cubists,

One can also distinguish something faintly Dadaist and even anti-
Rationalist in the non-structural parts of the Pavilion. A Mondriaanesque
Abstract logical consistency, for instance, would have dictated something
other than the naturalistic nude statue by Kolbe that stands in the smaller
pool—in this architecture it has something of the incongruity of Duchamp’s
‘Bottle-rack’ in an art exhibition, though it lives happily enough with the
marble wall that serves as a background to it. Again, the movable furniture,
and particularly the massive steel-framed chairs flout, consciously, one
suspects, the canons of economy inherent in that Rationalism that
del Marle had proposed as the motive force behind the employment
of steel in chairs; they are rhetorically over-size, immensely heavy, and
do not use the material in such a way as to extract maximum performance
from it,

It is clear that even if it were profitable to apply strict standards of
Rationatist efficiency or Functionalist formal determinism to such a struc-
ture, most of what makes it architecturally effective would go unncted in
such an analysis. ‘The same is true of the designs of Le Corbusier, whose -
work, while often extremely practical, does not yield up its secrets to
logical analysis alone. In his Dom-ine project for instance, he postulated a
structure whose only given elements were the floor slabs and the columns
that supported them, The disposition of the walls was thus left at liberty,
but some critics have logically extrapolated also that this left Le Corbusier
at the mercy of his floor slabs. Nothing could be farther from the truth as
far as his completed buildings are concerned which, from the villa at
Chaux-de-Fonds onwards, have their floor slabs treated in a most cavalier
fashion, and much of their internal architecture created by breaking
through from one storey to another. Conversely, if there is a building in
which the horizontal slabs are absolute, it is Mies’s Barcelona Pavilion—
the pools merely diversify the surface of the podium, nothing breaks
through the roof slab and nothing rises above it; the whole building is
desioned almost in two dimensions, and this is true of rouch of his later
work as well.

In the case of the other building of 1928 which it is proposed to study
here, Le Corbusier’s house, Les Heures Claires, built for the Savoye family
at Poissy-sur-Seine and completed in 1930, the vertical penetrations are of
crucial importance in the whole design, They are not large in plan but,
since they are effected by a pedestrian ramp, whose balustrades make bold
diagonals across many internal views, they are very conspicuous to a person

using the house. Furthermore, this ramp was designed as the preferred
route of what the architect calls the promenade architecturale through the
various spaces of the building—a concept which appears to lie close to
that almost mystical meaning of the word ‘axis’ that he had employed in
Vers une Arcintecture. The Hoors connected by this ramp are strongly
charactertsed functionally—on vit par étage—the ground floor being taken
up with services and servants, transport and entrance facilities, and a
guest room; the first floor given over to the main living accommodation,
virtually a week-end bungalow complete with patio; and the highest floor
a roof garden with sun-bathing deck and viewing platform, surrounded by
a windscreen wall.

This, of course, is only the functional breakdown; what makes the build-
ing architecture by Le Corbusier's standards and enables it to touch the
heart, is the way these three floors have been handled visually, The house
as a whole is white—/e couleur-type—and square—one of les plus belles
formes—set down in a sea of uninterrupted grass—le terrain idéal—which
the architect has called a Virgilian Landscape, Upon this traditional
ground he erected one of the least traditional buildings of his career, rich
in the imagery of the Twenties. The ground floor is set back a considerable
distance on three sides from the perimeter of the block, and the consequent
shadow into which it is plunged was deepened by dark paint and light-
absorbent areas of fenestration, When the house ts viewed from the grounds,
this floor hardly registers visually, and the whole upper part of the house
appears to be delicately poised in space, supported only by the row of
slender pilotis under the edge of the first floor—precisely that species of
material-immaterial illusionism that Oud had prophesied, but that Le
Corbusier more often practised.

However, the setting back of the ground floor has further meaning. It
leaves room for a motor-car to pass between the wall and the pilotis sup-
porting the floor above; the curve of this wall on the side away from the road
was, Le Corbusier claims, dictated by the minimum turning circle of a car.
A car, having set down its passengers at the main entrance on the apex of
this curve, could pass down the other side of the building, still under the
cover of the fioor above, and return to the maim road along a drive parallel
to that on which it had approached the house. This appears to be nothing
less than a typically Carbusian ‘inversion’ of the test-track on roof of the
Matté-Trucco’s Fiat factory, tucked under the building instead of laid on
top of it, creating a suitably emotive approach to the home of a fully
motorised post-Futurist family. Inside this floor, the entrance hall has an
irregular plan, but is given a business-like and ship-shape appearance by
narrow-paned industrial glazing, by the plain balustrades of the ramp and
the spiral staircase leading to the floor above, and by the washbasin, light
fittings, etc. which, as in the Pavillon de’ Esprit Nouveau, appear to be of in-
dustrial or nautical extraction, On the main living floor above, the planning

Fe

shows less of that Beaux-Arts formality that had appeared in the slightly
earlier house at Garches, but is composed much as an Abstract painting
might have been composed, by jig-sawing together a number of rectangles
to fit into. a given square plan. The feeling of the arrangement of parts
within a pre-determined frame is heightened by the continuous and un-
varied window-strip—the ultimate fenétreen longueur—that runs right round
this floor, irrespective of the needa of the rooms or open spacea behind it.
However, where this strip runs across the wall of the open patio it Is un-
glazed, as is the viewing window in the screen wall of the roof-garden, a
fulfilment, however late and unconscious, of Marinetti’s demand for villas
sited for view and breeze. The screen wall, again, raises painterly echoes:
in contrast to the square plan of the main floor, it is composed of irregular
curves and short straights, mostly standing well back from perimeter of the
block. Not only are these curves, on plan, like the shapes to be found in his
Peintures Puristes, but their modelling, seen in raking sunlight, has the
game delicate and insubstantial air aa that of the bottles and giasses in his
paintings and the effect of these curved forms, standing on a square slab
raised on legs is like nothing so much as a still-life arranged on a table,
And set down in this landscape it has the same kind of Dadaist quality as
the statue in the Barcelona Pavilion.

Enough has been said to show that no single-valued criterion, such as
Functionalism, will ever serve to explain the forms and surfaces of these
buildings, and enough should also have been said to suggest the way in
which they are rich in the associations and symbolic values current in their
time. And enough has also been said to show that they came extraordinarily
close to realising the general idea of a Machine Age architecture that was
entertained by their designers. Their status as masterpieces rests, as it does
with most other masterpieces of architecture, upon the authority and
felicity with which they give expression to a view of men in relation to their
environment. They are masterpieces of the order of the Sainte Chapelle or
the Villa Rotonda, and if one speaks of them in the present, in spite of the
fact that one no longer exists and the other is squalidly neglected, it is
because in a Machine Age we have the benefit of massive photographie
records of both in their pristine magnificence, and can form of them an
estimate far more plastically exact than one ever could from, say, the note-
books of Villard d’Honnecourt of the Quatire Libr: of Palladio.

But because of this undoubted success, we are entitled to enquire, at the
very highest level, whether the aims of the International Style were worth
entertaining, and whether its estimate of a Machine Age was a viable one.
Something like a fiat rebuttal of both aims and estimate can be found in the
writings of Buckminster Fuller,

It was apparent that the going design-blindness of the lay level . . . afforded
European designers an opportunity... to develop their preview discernment
of the more appealing simplicities of the industral structures that had inadver-

tently earned their architectural freedom, not by conscious aesthetical innova-
tion, but through profit-inspired discard of economic irrelevancies. . .. Thia
surprise discovery, as the European designer well knew, could soon be made
universally appealing as a fad, for had they not themselves been so faddiehly
inspired. The ‘International Style’ brought to America by the Bauhaus inno-
vators, demonstrated fashion-inoculation without necessity of knowledge of the
scientific fundamentals of structural mechanics and chemistry.

The International Style ‘siraplification’ then was but superficial. It peeled off
yesterday's exterior embellishment and put on instead formalised novelties of
quasi-simplicity, permitted by the same hidden structural elements of modem
alloys that had permitted the discarded Beaux-Arts parmentation. It was still a
European garmentation. The new International Stylist hung ‘stark motif walle’
of vast super-meticulous brick assemblage, which had no tensile cohesiveness
within its own bonds, but was, in fect, locked within hidden steel frames sup-
ported by steel without visthle means af support. In many such illusory ways did
the ‘International Style’ pain dramatic sensory impingement on society as does
atrick man gain the attention of children. ...

... the Bauhaus and International used standard plumbing &ztures and only
ventured so far as to persuade manufacturers to modify the surface of the valve
handles and spigots, and the colour, size, and arrangements of the tiles. ‘The In-
ternational Bauhaus never went back of the wall-surface to look at the plumbing
... they never enquired into the overall problem of sanitary fittings them-
selves... . In short they only looked at problems of modifications of the surface
of end-products, which end-products were inherently sub-functions of 2 tech-
nically obsolete world,

There is much more, in an equaliy damaging vein, picking on other yulner-
able points of the International Style besides the lack of technical training
at the Bauhaus, the formalism and illusionist, the failure te grip funda-
mental problems of building technology, but these are his main points.
Theugh there is clearly a strain of US patriotism running through this
hostile appraisal, it is not mere wisdom after the fact, nor is it an Olympian
judgement delivered from a point far above the practicalities of building.

As early as 1927, Fuller had advanced, in his Dymaxion House project, a
concept of domestic design that might just have been built in the condition
of materials technology at the time, and had it been built, would have
rendered Les Heures Claires, for instance, technically obsolete before design
had even begun. The Dymaxion concept was entirely radical, a hexagonal
ring of dwelling-space, walled in double skins of plastic in different trans-
parencies according to lighting needs, and hung by wires from the apex of
a central duralumin mast which also housed all the mechanical services.
The formal qualities of this design are not remarkable, except in combina-
tion with the structural and planning methods involved. The structure does
not derive from the imposition of a Perretesque or Elementarist aesthetic
on a material that has been elevated to the level of a symbol for ‘the
machine’, but is an adaptation of light-metal methods employed in aircraft
construction at the time. The planning derives from a liberated attitude to
these mechanical services that had precipitated the whole Modern adven-
ture by their invasion of homes and streets before 1914.

Even those like Le Corbusier who had given specific attention to this

mechanical revolution in domestic service had been content for the most
part to distribute it through the house according to the distribution of its
pre-mechanical equivalent. Thus cooking facilities went into the roam that
would have been called ‘kitchen’ even without a gas oven, washing machines
into 2 room still conceived as a ‘laundry’ in the old sense, gramophone into
the ‘music room’, yacuum cleaner to the ‘broom cupboard’, and so forth.
In the Fuller version this equipment is seen as more alike, in being mechant-
cal, than different because of time-honoured functional differentiations,
and is therefore packed together in the central core of the house, whence it
distributes services—heat, light, music, cleanliness, nourishment, ventila-
tion, to the surrounding living-space.

There is something strikingly, but coincidentally, Futurist about the
Dymaxion House. It was to be light, expendable, made of those substitutes
for wood, stone and brick of which Sant'Elia had spoken, just as Fuller
also shared his aim of harmonising environment and man, and of exploiting
every benefit of science and technology. Furthermore, in the idea of a
central core distributing services through the surrounding space there is a
concept that strikingly echoes Boccioni’s field-theory of space, with objects
distributing lines of force through their surroundings.

Many more of Fuller's ideas, derived from a first-hand knowledge of
building techniques and the investigation of other technologies, reveal a
similarly quasi-Futurist bent, and in doing so they indicate something that
was being increasingly misiaid in mainstream Modern architecture as the
Twenties drew to a close, As was said at the beginning of this book, the
theory and aesthetics of the International Style were evolved between
Futurism and Academicism, but their perfection was only achieved by
drawing away from Futurism and drawing nearer to the Academic tradi-
tion, whether derived from Blanc or Guadet, and by justifying this tendency
by Rationalist and Determinist theories of a pre-Futurist type. Perfection,
such as is scen in the Barcelona Pavilion and Les Heures Clatres, could only
have been achieved in this manner since Futurism, dedicated te the ‘con-
stant renovation of our architectonic environment’ precludes processes with
definite terminations such as a process of perfection must be.

Jn cutting themselves off from the philosophical aspects of Futurism,
though hoping to retain its prestige as Machine Age art, theorists and
designers of the waning Twenties cut themselves off not only from their
own historical beginnings, but also from their footheld im the world of
technology, whose character Fuller defined, and rightly, as an

... unhaltabie trend to constantly accelerating change

a trend that the Futurists had fully appreciated before him. But the main-
stream of the Modern Movement had begun to lose sight of this aspect of
technology very early in the Twenties, as can be seen (a) from their choice
of symbolic forms and symbolic mental processes, and (5) their use of the

theory of types. ‘The apparent appositeness of the Phileban solids as sym-
bols of mechanistic appropriateness depended in part on an historical
coincidence affecting vehicle technology that was fully, though superficially,
exploited by Le Corbusier in Vers une Architecture, and partly on a mys-
tique of mathematics. In picking on mathematics as a source of technological
prestige for their own mental operations, men like Le Corbusier and Mon-
driaan contrived to pick on the only important part of scientific and tech-
nological methodology that was not new, but had been equally current in
the pre-machine epoch. In any case, mathematics, like other branches of
logic, is only an operational technique, not a creative discipline. The
devices that characterised the Machine Age were the products of intuition,
experiment or pragmatic knowledge—no one could now design a self-
starter without a knowledge of the mathematics of electricity, but it was
Charles F. Kettering, not mathematics, that invented the first electric-
atarter on the basis of a sound grasp of mechanical methods.

In picking on the Phileban solids and mathematics, the creators of the
International Style took a convenient short-cut to creating an ad hoc
language of symbolic forms, but it was a language that could only com-
municate under the special conditions of the Twenties, when automobiles
were visibly comparable to the Parthenon, when aircraft structure really
did resemble Elementarist space cages, when ships’ superstructures really
did appear to follow Beaux-Arts rules of symmetry, and the additive
method of design pursued in many branches of machine technology was
surprisingly like Guadet’s elementary composition, However, certain events
of the early Thirties made it clear that the apparent symbolic relevance
of these forms and methods was purely a contrivance, not an organic
growth from principles common to both technology and architecture, and,
as it happened, a number of vehicles designed in the USA, Germany and
Britain revealed the weakness of the architects’ position.

As soon as performance made it necessary to pack the components of 2
vehicle into 2 compact streamlined shell, the visual link between the In-
ternational Style and technclogy was broken. The Burney ‘Streamliners’
in Britain, and the racing cars designed in Germany in 1933 for the 1934
Grand Prix Formula, the Heinkel He 70 research aircraft, and the Boeing
247D transport aircraft in the US all belong to a radically altered world ta
that of their equivalents a decade earlier. Though there was no particular
reason why architecture should take note of these developments in another
field or necessarily transform itself in step with vehicle technology, one
might have expected an art that appeared so emotionally entangled with
technology to show some signs of this upheaval.

What, in fact, happened is of vital importance to the International Style’s
claims to be a Machine Age architecture. In the same early years of the
Thirties, Walter Gropius designed a series of closely related bodies for
Adler cars. They were handsomely conceived structures, with much in-

genuity in their furnishing, including such features as reclining seats, but
they show no awareness of the revolution in vehicle form that was pro-
ceeding at the time; they are still elementary compositions, and apart from
mechanical improvements in the chassis, engine and running gear, for which
Gropius was not responsible, they are no advance on the bodies that had
been illustrated in Vers une Architecture, On the other hand, we find
Fuller justifying his nght to speak slightingly of the International Style by
designing, in 1933, a vehicle fully as advanced as the Burney cars, and
revealing thereby a grasp of the mind of technology which the Inter-
national Style had failed to acquire.

This failure was followed promptly, though net consequentially, by the
emergence of another kind of vehicle designed to take advantage of yet
another aspect of technology that the masters of the International Style
seem to have failed to grasp. This was the first genuinely stylist-designed
car, Harley Earle’s Lasalle of 1934, whose aesthetics were conceived in
terms of mass-production for a changing public market, not of an unchange-
able type or norm. There is a curious point here: Le Corbusier had made
great play with the idea of a fairly high rate of scrapping, but he seems not
to have visualised it as part of a continuous process inherent in the tech-
nalogical approach, bound to continue as long as technology continues, but
merely as stages in the evolution of a final type or norm, whose perfection,
he, Pierre Urbain, Paul Valéry, Piet Mondriaan and many others saw as an
event of the immediate future, or even the immediate past. In practice, a
high rate of scrapping of our movable equipment seems to imply nothing
of the sort, but rather a constant renewal of the environment, an unhaltable
trend to constantly accelerating change. In opting for stabilised types or
norms, architects opted for the pauses when the normal processes of tech-
nology were interrupted, those processes of change and renovation that, as
far as we can see, can only be halted by abandoning technology as we
know it today, and bringing both research and mass-production to a stap.

Whether or not the enforcement of norms and types by such a conscious
manoeuvre would be good for the human race, is a problem that does not
concern the present study. Nor was it a question that was entertained by
the theorists and designers of the First Machine Age. They were for
allowing technology to run its course, and believed that they understood
where it was going, even without having bothered to acquaint themselves
with it very closely. In the upshot, 2 historian must find that they produced
a Machine Age architecture only in the sense that its monuments were
built in a Machine Age, and expressed an attitude to machinery—in the
sense that one might stand on French soil and discuss French politics, and
still be speaking English. It may well be that what we have hitherto under-
stood as architecture, and what we are beginning to understand of tech-
nology are incompatible disciplines. The architect who proposes to run with
technology knows now that he will be in fast company, and that, in order

to keep up, he may have to emulate the Futurists and discard his whole
cultural load, including the professional garments by which he is recog-
nised as an architect. If, on the other hand, he decides not to deo this, he
may find that a technological culture has decided to go on without him,
It is a choice that the masters of the Twenties failed to observe until they
bad made it by accident, but it is the kind of accident that architecture
may not survive a second time—vwe may believe that the architects of the
First Machine Age were wrong, but we in the Second Machine Age have
ne reason yet to be superior about them,
