BOOK Bruno Zevi The Modern Language of Architecture.pdf
THE MODERN
LANGUAGE
OF ARCHITECTURE

By Bruno Zevi

UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON PRESS
Seattle and London

Introduction: Speaking Architecture

In 1964 John Summerson published a short book entitled The
Classical Language of Architecture, which has been very successful
throughout the world. I waited a decade for its logical and neces-
sary sequel, “The Anticlassical Language of Architecture” or,
rather, ‘“The Modern Language of Architecture,” but neither Sum-
merson nor anyone else wrote it. Why not? One can imagine a
host of daunting reasons. Nevertheless the gap needs filling. It
is the most urgent task facing architectural history and criticism
today. It cannot be postponed, it is already long overdue.
Without a language, we cannot speak. What is more, it is lan-
~ guage that “speaks us,” in the sense that it provides the instru-
ments of communication without which it would be impossible
even to work out our thoughts. Yet in the course of centuries
only one architectural language has been codified, that of classi-
cism. None other has been processed and put into the systematic
form required of an acknowledged language. All were considered
exceptions to the rule, the classical rule, and not alternatives to
it, with a life of their own. Even modern architecture, which
emerged in reaction against neoclassicism, runs the risk of revert-
ing to stale Beaux-Arts archetypes unless it is structured into a
language.
This is an incredible and absurd situation. We are squandering
a colossal heritage of expression because we shirk the responsibil-
ity of transcribing it and making it transmissible. It may not be
very long before we forget how to speak architecture at all. Indeed,
most people who are designing and building today can barely
mumble. They utter inarticulate meaningless sounds that carry
no message. They do not know how to speak. They say nothing
and have nothing to say. There is an even more serious danger
facing us. If the modern movement is ever jettisoned, we may

-

no longer be able to read the images of any architects who have
spoken a language other than classicism: the images of the Stone
Age, late antiquity and the Middle Ages, the works of the Man-
nerists, Michelangelo, Borromini, the Arts and Crafts movement
and Art Nouveau, Wright, Loos, Le Corbusier, Gropius, Mies,
Aalto, Scharoun, and the younger men from Johansen to Safdie.

Nobody uses the classical orders today. But classicism is a state
of mind that goes beyond the ‘‘orders” and stultifies even those
discourses which are uttered using anticlassical nouns and verbs.
The Beaux-Arts system actually codified Gothic, then Roman-
esque, Baroque, Egyptian, Japanese, and finally modern architec-
ture by a very simple expedient: it put them on ice by classicizing
their free structure. Surely, if it should prove impossible to formu-
late the modern idiom in truly dynamic fashion, it would go
the same suicidal way, which is what more than one wretched
critic and/or architect wishes would happen.

It is therefore essential that we try to codify the modern lan-
guage at once, without looking for a priori solutions to all the
theoretical problems involved. Abstract theories are often an alibi
for further delays. Dozens of books and hundreds of essays have
discussed the question of whether or not architecture can be
treated as a language, whether nonverbal languages have a double
articulation (or dual patterning), and whether the attempt at codi-
fying modern architecture might not block its development. Se-
miology is certainly essential, but by itself it cannot solve architec-
tural problems. For better or worse, architects communicate. And
the fact remains that they speak architecture, whether it is a
language or not. Thus we must set down precisely what it implies
to speak architecture in an anticlassical key. If we can do this,
the theoretical apparatus will come by itself as we proceed with
our work.

There are thousands of architects and students of architecture
designing, without knowing the vocabulary, the grammar, and
the syntax of the contemporary language, which are, in fact, a
kind of antivocabulary, antigrammar, and antisyntax in relation
to classicism. Critical judgments are being made on two levels,
in the profession and in the schools. But what standards are used?
And are they legitimate? This is the challenge that faces us, both

as producers and as consumers of architecture. If we are going
to understand one another, we must use the same terms and
agree on their meaning. The problem seems enormous only be-
cause it has been so little investigated until now.

Ours is an intentionally provocative goal: to establish a series
of “invariables” in the modern language of architecture, based
on the most significant and challenging buildings. A question
might arise. Some code is indispensable in verbal communication;
otherwise there is a danger of not communicating at all. In archi-
tecture, however, anyone can dispense with it at will, without
having to give up building for this reason. Of course, he can
design even in Babylonian style if he wants to, but all he can
communicate are his own neuroses.

I have discussed the question of architectural language with
scholars, practicing architects, and most often with anxious and
confused students, quite bewildered by the fact that nobody
teaches them an idiom they can speak. A single conclusion came
out of these conversations: although there are excellent excuses
for not facing such a difficult and painful problem, the present
impasse must be overcome and a beginning made.

This book is even shorter than Summerson’s. Only seven invari-
ables are analyzed. One could add ten more, or twenty, or fifty,
so long as they do not contradict the first seven. The validity
of this approach must be tested on the drawing board and on
real buildings. Everyone can set about checking this “basic lan-
guage.” And it should come as no surprise that, out of a hundred
buildings erected nowadays, ninety prove to be altogether anach-
ronistic works that belong somewhere between the Renaissance
and Beaux-Arts, while eight have some incoherent elements of
modern “‘‘style,” and, in the best of circumstances, maybe two
are merely ungrammatical, that is to say, they do not speak the
old language, but neither do they speak the new one. And that
is not all. Even the great masters of the modern movement have
sometimes produced regressive classicist works. Thus one cannot
help asking, what kind of language is this, if no one or very
few people can speak it? Let me answer with another question:
how could the modern language of architecture be widely spoken
without a code?

These pages have the same goal as any other heretical act: to
arouse dissent. If they provoke argument, they will have achieved
their aim. Instead of talking endlessly about architecture, we shall
finally begin to speak architecture. *

1 The dictatorship of the straight line (cartoon by Mauris) It is responsible
tor the mania of parallels, proportions, chessboard layouts. and right angles—
the lexicon, grammar, and syntax of classicism. The monuments of so-called “clas -
sical” antiquity have been manhandled to conform to this abstract a priori
ideology

“Four years after the publication of the Italian edition of this book, a most amusing
essay by Charles fencks has been published with the title The Languaye of Post Modern Architecture
(New York Rizzol, 1977) It shows that the post modern, opposing the modern, goes back
to the preomodern, that as, to academuc classnasm Perhaps this book should be retitled,
“The Post-Post-Modern Language of Architecture “

Listing as Design Methodology

The list, or inventory, of functions is the generating principle
of the modern language in architecture, and it subsumes all other
principles. Listing marks the ethical and operational dividing line
between those who speak in modern terms and those who chew
on dead languages. Every error, every involution, every psycho-
logical lapse and mental block at the drawing table can be traced
back, without exception, to a failure to respect this principle.
Therefore it is the basic invariable of the contemporary code.

Implicit in listing, or compiling an inventory of functions, is
the dismantling and critical rejection of classical rules, “orders,”
a priori assumptions, set phrases, and conventions of every type
and kind. The inventory springs from an act of cultural annihila-
tion—what Roland Barthes calls ‘the zero degree of writing’’—
and leads to a rejection of all traditional norms and canons. It
demands a new beginning, as if no linguistic system had ever
existed before, as if it were the first time in history that we had
to build a house or a city.

The list is an ethical principle even before it becomes an opera-
tional one. Indeed, with tremendous effort and immense joy, we
must strip away the cultural taboos we have inherited. We must
track them down one by one in our minds and desanctify them.
For the modern architect, the paralyzing taboos are dogmas, con-
ventions, inertia, all the dead weight accumulated during centuries
of classicism. By destroying every institutionalized model, he can
break free from idolatry. He can reconstruct and relive the whole
process of man’s formation and development, realizing that more
than once in the course of the millennia, architects have wiped

the slate clean and erased every grammatical and syntactical rule.
In fact. genuinely creative spirits have always started from scratch.
The modern revolution is not unprecedented or apocalyptic. There
has been a recurrent struggle against repressive bonds throughout
the ages.

Listing. going back to the zero degree, makes you rethink archi-
tectural semantics. In the beginning, verbs and conjunctions must
be eliminated. Words can no longer be used unless their content
and meaning have been analyzed in depth. Some examples will
get us to the heart of this methodology of design.

Windows. In the classical tradition a module is selected for
the openings of a Renaissance or pseudo-Renaissance building.
Then the sequence of modules is examined, along with the rela-
tionship between full and empty surface areas. Finally, the hori-
zontal and vertical alignments, that is, the superimposition of
the orders. are established. Fortunately the modern architect is
tree of these formalistic concerns. He is engaged in a more complex
and rewarding task of resemanticization. First of all, no repetitive
modules. Every window is a word that stands for itself, what it
means and what it does. It is not something to be aligned or
proportioned It may be any shape—rectangular, square, round,
elliptical, triangular, composite, or free profile. Depending on the
room it must light, the window may be anything from a long
narrow strip at ceiling or floor level to a cut in the wall or a
running band at eve level: whatever may be desired or considered
suitable after calculating the specific window’s function room by
room. There is no reason why every window in a building should
be just like the next one and not have a character of its own.
Onee vou get rid of the tvranny of classicism, windows will be
all the more effective if they are different and can convey a host
Of Messages.

Classicism breaks the facade into vertical and horizontal sec-
tions But eliminating the juxtaposition and superimposition of
modules will make the facade whole again. What is far more
important. the facade will become antoisted. When the openings—
high or low. straight or crooked—are no longer regulated by axial
relationships, the facade will cease to be closed and aloof, an
end in itself, and begin talking to its surroundings. It will stop

2. The methodology of listing functions, applied to windows. Classicism, whether
old classicism (above) or the pseudomodern (center), is concerned with the module,
its repetition, the relationship between full and empty spaces, and alignment. It
is concerned with everything except windows. Listing gives back to every element
its specific meaning /below/ and then assembles the various elements.

being extraneous and hostile and start taking an active part in
the citv—or landscape.

Windows are not an appropriate example in discussing modern
architecture because, as we will see later, the principle of func-
tional listing precludes the very idea of “facade.’’ Nevertheless,
when an architect works in urban fabrics conceived according
to preordained schemes and volumes, he is forced to design fa-
cades But that is no reason to give up the modern language.
The minute he differentiates windows by form and position, he
has done away with the traditional facade and its classical conno-
tations. Indeed, he can inject new life into it by making some
windows protrude and others recede, by playing with the thick-
ness of the wall to create a frame of shadow around the glass
or, an the contrary, to bring the glass forward into the blaze of
light. And why not slant the windows to the surface of the facade?
One window can tilt down, focusing on a square, a tree, or a
dvorway across the street. Another can turn up, framing a piece
of sky. A window can be slanted left or right to catch panoramic
VIEWS, a section of street, a monument, or the sea. Windows
can be conceived with a wealth of angles, so that their surfaces
are never parallel to the building front.

Even when limited to the detail of windows, the principle of
functional listing challenges the classical approach to the fagade,
takes away its “finished” look, and breaks its square frame by
fragmenting the corners of the building and maybe the line be-
tween top floor and roof. A double aim is achieved: alternate
lighting solutions in the interiors and heightened expressive quali-
ties on the outside.

IT can imagine two objections, one of simple dismay and the
other of ideological alibis masking dismay. The first objection
is that a frightening amount of work is involved in this procedure:
if the outline and position of every window have to be thought
out separately, the design of a ten-window taqade is going to
take too much time and energy, far out of proportion to the
rewards The second objection is that such a method may lead
to an “academy of misrule,” to the triumph of arbitrariness.

The answer to the first objection ts that it is largely true. The
only correct way to design a window is to study the space it

lights, for the perceptual and behavioral value of any space de-
pends on how it is lighted. The fact is that spaces and volumes,
the whole building, have to be planned before it is decided what
shapes of window to choose. Is modern architecture hard? Proba-
bly, but it is splendid because every element, every word of it,
is related to a social content. If it were easy, most of the buildings
put up today would be truly modern. Suffice it to look at their
windows to realize that they are quite often the product of aca-
demic irresponsibility.

As to the second objection, that the modern language of archi-
tecture tends to be arbitrary: on the contrary, classicism is totally
arbitrary, in so far as it gives mythical value to abstract orders
that repress freedom and social behavior. Does functional listing
lead to disorder? Yes, to sacrosanct disorder that drives out idola-
trous order and the taboos imposed by standardized and alienating
mass production. The listing method rejects the products of neo-
capitalist industry, just as William Morris rejected paleocapitalist
products in the second half of the nineteenth century. Industry
too often promotes sameness; it categorizes, standardizes, and
classicizes. Recent skyscrapers with their curtain walls are more
static, boxy, and monolithic than those built fifty years ago. You
can see it from the windows as well.

The two objections betray troubled psychological origins. The
modern language increases the possibilities of choice, while classi-
cal architecture reduces them. Choice creates anguish, a neurotic
“anxiety for certainty.’” What is to be done? There are no tranquil-
izers for this ailment. But are there in other areas? Does not
abstract painting arouse a similar anguish? What about dodeca-
phonic and aleatory or accidental music? And conceptual art? Is
it not anguishing to look at oneself in the mirror for the first
time and recognize oneself in an image outside oneself, or to
learn that the earth rotates even though it seems to be standing
still? Fear of freedom and horror of irrational impulses are at
the bottom of this anguish. Let us suppose for a moment that,
in a given building, windows could be alike or different without
altering their function in any way. The modern language says,
let them be different, let there be more choices. The classical
code dictates that they all be alike, they must be orderly—like

corpses But the hypothesis that they may be equally functional
is absurd, really arbitrary. This merely contirms an established
fact, but one that is very hard te instillin the minds of architects:
What seems rational and logical, because it is regulated and or-
dered, is humanly and socially foolish: it makes sense only in
terms of despotic power What is presumed irrational, on the
other hand, is generally the result of thinking things through
and courageously yranting the imagination its riphts. Classicism
is fine fer cemeteries, net tor lite: Only death can resolve the
“anviety of certainty”

What has been said about windows should be repeated for
every aspect of design on any scale: volumes and spaces, their
interrelationships, urban complexes, and regional planning. The
mvariable is always the functional list. Why should a room be
cubical or prismatic, instead of free form and harmonious with
its uses? Why should a group of rooms form a simple box? Why
must a building be conceived as the wrapping for a lot of small
boxes packed inside a larger box? Why should it be closed in
on itself. making a sharp distinetion between the architectural
cavities and the urban or natural landscapes Why must all the
rooms in anapartment be the same height? And so on. The invari-
able of modern language consists in whys and what-fors, in not
submitting toa priori laws, in rethinking every conventional state-
ment, and in the systematic development and verification of new
hypotheses. A will to be tree of idolatrous precepts is the main-
spring of modern architecture, beginning with Le Corbusier’s fa-
mous five principles: the “tree” plan, the “tree” facade, the pilotis
that leave the ground “tree” under the building, the roof garden
that implies the “tree” use of the top of the building, and even
the strip window, in so far as it offers further evidence that the
fagade is “tree of structural elements

The list appreach continually makes a clean start. It verifies
and challenges even the tive principles, as Le Corbusier himself
did in his later vears, from Ronchamp on. Indeed, his earlier ‘pur-
ism imposed heavy desizn restrictions, because the plan was
“tree only within the perimeter of a “pure” geometric figure.
Why should we sanctity geometry. or straight lines, or right an-
gles? The functional list says ce to these prescriptions as well.

It affects content and form, individual ethics and collective life,
just as language does.

The following chapters examine other applications of this in-
variable. There is no modern architecture outside the list process.
The rest is fraud, classicist or pseudomodern. It is a crime, when
there is a proper language of architecture to speak.

3. The methodology of listing functions, applied to volumes. Old and pseudo-
modern classicism boxes man’s activities, ignoring their specific differences. Then
it sets the boxes above and beside each other to form a larger box (left). Listing
gives meaning back to volumes, groups them, but preserving their individuality

(right).

4. Where to hang a picture. Anywhere except in the middle of a wall fabeve/.
Where to put a door. Anywhere except in the middle ‘enter, The farther the
door is from the middle, the deeper the room will look center, below/. The corner
door is the ideal it enhances the diagonal shrlowy.

Asymmetry and Dissonance

Where then? Anywhere else. When you criticize something for being
symmetrically arranged, and you are asked where else to put it,
your answer should be: anywhere else. There is only one place that
is radically wrong, the place that is selected “spontaneously,”
dredging up all the atavistic conventions of the subconscious.

We can take an even simpler example than the window to
demonstrate this, a picture. Here is a wall. Where shall we hang
the picture? In the center, of course. No, anywhere else. To the
right or left, higher up or lower down, anywhere but there. If
you hang the picture in the middle, it splits the wall into two
equal parts. It reduces the visual dimensions and makes them
trivial. The picture seems to be framed and isolated by the wall,
when it could open up the room and give it breathing space.

Symmetry is one of the invariables of classicism. Therefore
asymmetry is an invariable of the modern language. Once you
get rid of the fetish of symmetry, you will have taken a giant
step on the road to a democratic architecture.

Symmetry = economic waste + intellectual cynicism. Any time
you see a house consisting of a central core with two symmetrical
lateral extensions you can reject it out of hand. What is in the
left wing? The living room, perhaps. And in the right one? Bed-
rooms and bathrooms. Is there any conceivable reason why the
two enveloping volumes should be. identical? The architect wasted
space by enlarging the living room to make it the same size as
the bedrooms. Or else he restricted essential functions of the
sleeping area to keep it the same size as the living room. And
look at the height of the ceilings. Why should a vast living room

5 Rome, Piazza Venezia. The old narrow square ‘hove: could have accommodated
an evocative monument like Le Corbusier's “Open Hand” /second row, left! Instead
it was blasted open to make room for the pharaonic Victor Emmanuel Monument
(ritht and third row/. Of course, no asymmetry was allowed shelowy.

have a low ceiling? On the other hand, if the bedroom ceiling
is too high, the space seems visually cramped and suffocating.
It is a flagrant waste, both economically and esthetically; a double
injury and a double sacrifice. On the altar of what taboo is this
sacrifice laid? On the altar of symmetry.

Symmetry =a spasmodic need for security, fear of flexibil-
ity, indetermination, relativity, and growth—in short, fear of
living. The schizophrenic cannot bear the temporal aspect of liv-
ing. To keep his anguish under control, he requires immobility.
Classicism is the architecture of conformist schizophrenia.
Symmetry = passivity or, in Freudian terms, homosexuality. This
is explained by psychoanalysts. Homologous parts instead of
heteronymous parts. It is infantile fear of the father—the academy,
in this case, is a father figure, protective of the cowardly child—
who will castrate you if you attack a heteronymous figure, the
woman, the mother. As soon as one becomes passive and accepts
symmetry, the anguish seems to subside, because the father no
longer threatens, he possesses.

Perhaps the whole history of architecture could be reread in
terms of symmetry neurosis. Certainly that of Western architec-
ture could be. It is no accident, for example, that Italy was the
first country to revive the worship of this idol during the Renais-
sance, while other countries continued to develop the Gothic style.
The economy of the Italian peninsula was going through a severe
crisis which the dominant classes tried to conceal behind a classi-
cist mask. They evoked the Greco-Roman past in a mythical key
in order to camouflage the instability of the present. They assumed
a courtly, forbidding, or Olympian air to hide the desolation of
society. It has always been like that: symmetry is the facade of
sham power trying to appear invulnerable. The public buildings
of Fascism, Nazism, and Stalinist Russia are all symmetrical. Those
of South American dictatorships are symmetrical. Those of theo-
cratic institutions are symmetrical; they often have a double sym-
metry. Can you imagine an asymmetrical Victor Emmanuel Mon-
ument in Rome, out of balance, varied in its parts, with an
equestrian statue to the left or right rather than in the center?
An Italy capable of building that kind of monument would have
been another kind of nation, one committed to the creation of

a democratic state administration, an efficient service sector, a
society. balanced between northern and southern regions and
based on justice. As a matter of fact, such a country would not
have wasted public funds on a marble monstrosity like the Victor
Emmanuel Monument. Such a society would not have disfigured
the Piazza Venezia with something that made its proportions so
trivial, by moving the Palazzetto Venezia and tearing down the
Palazzo Torlonia; in short, ruining not only an architectural hub
but the whole townscape of Rome. [t would have used the money
to build lower-class housing, schools. and libraries and to reform
agriculture and public health facilities. The Victor Emmanuel
Monument reflects the fragility of a backward nation that pre-
tends to be progressive by striking a triumphant, monumental,
arrogant, and bombastic attitude. The flame of the Unknown Sol-
dier at the foot of the Are de Triomphe in Paris and the Cenotaph
in London pale in modesty betore this horror, whose symmetry
rises to titanic heights of wickedness.

There are symmetrical buildings that are not rhetorical, but
all rhetorical buildings—symbols of totalitarian power or products
of sloth and cynicism—are symmetrical. On closer examination,
moreover, nonrhetorical symmetrical buildings prove to be only
partially symmetrical, generally only on the main front. This leads
to another observation: symmetry has been used in the most ob-
scene way to deform and falsity the arrangement of historic mon-
uments. The most striking example: the Propylaea of the Athenian
Acropolis. These have a blasphemously asymmetric plan; but
since the Ecole des Beaux-Arts could not admit that such a heret-
ical structure stood at the very entrance to the sanctuary of classi-
cism, Mnesicles’ work was displayed as if it were symmetrical.
Why? Because in a moment of mental aberration the Greeks had
made a mistake, and it had to be corrected. Another example:
the Erechtheum, a quite irregular and asymmetrical building, so
“modern” that ina way it is a forerunner of Adolf Loos’s multilev-
eled Raumplan. What weight did the Erechtheum carry in the
Beaua-Arts doctrine? None. It was not symmetrical, so it could

serve NO purpose.
Take a room, for example. Where should the entrance door
be? Anywhere, just so lony as it is not in the middle of a wall.

6. How to light a room. Not in the middle (above), Any other arrangement would
be better: comer window, strip window, double strip (center). In the Rome railway
station, a double glass strip provides light for the offices (below, /e/t), but a greater
variety of shapes would have been preferable fright).

That would split the space in two. What ‘‘anywhere else” really
means is the most conveniently uncentral position, so that the
diagonal can be enhanced to create the maximum sense of depth.
And to accent the diagonal view, why not detach the entrance
door from the wall surface and tilt it? Fine, let us give it a specific
meaning, different from the other doors.

The same room. Where should the light come from? Anywhere,
as long as it is not in the center of a wall, dividing the room
into three sections, an illuminated one between two areas of dark-
ness. Let us give each window new meaning as a specific light
carrier in function of the interior space. If there is no view outside,
try a strip window at floor level, another one at the ceiling (with
a different width to avoid symmetry), and perhaps vertical strips
at the corners to light the walls. In the offices of the Rome railway
station there are two strips of window per floor, one at desk
level and one at the ceiling. This is a satisfactory arrangement,
although classicized by too much repetition of the motif. When
windows are installed in opposite walls, they must not face each
other directly: they will merely light each other and not the room.
Take the Room of the Months in the famous Palazzo Schifanoia
in Ferrara. Every window faces a full panel on the other side of
the room, thus providing magnificent lighting for the marvelous
Este frescoes.

Symmetry is a single, though macroscopic, symptom of a tumor
whose cells have metastasized everywhere in geometry. The his-
tory of cities could be interpreted as the clash between geometry
(an invariable of dictatorial or bureaucratic power) and free forms
(which are congenial to human life). For hundreds of thousands
of years the paleolithic community was ignorant of geometry.
But as soon as neolithic settlements began and hunter-cultivators
were subjected to a tribal chief, the chessboard made its appear-
ance. Political absolutism imposes geometry, and absolutist gov-
ernments regiment the urban structure by establishing axes and
then more axes, either parallel to each other or intersecting at
right angles. Barracks, prisons, and military installations are rig-
idly geometrical. Citizens are not allowed to make a natural curved
turning to the left or the right. They must spring round 90 degrees

.

like marionettes. The plans of new cities are gererallv .a:c +
on a grillwork. There have been exceptional cases cf cine: fe-
signed on hexagonal or triangular schemes, but tney nave reve:
left the drawing board. New York is a chessboard, witn Broecway
the only diagonal. Imperial Paris is based on brutai slashes rat
sadistically gashed the pre-existing popular fabric oO the ote
Latin America was colonized with peremptory laws that impcsec
a priori geometrical forms on cities, whatever their natural topcz-
raphy might have been.

Cities, and especially capitals, are regular victims or gecmetriia.
operations. They survive only because their growth =
administrative and political prescriptions Sm2iu towns cr the
contrary, and particularly rural towns, are not usualiv gecmettirs.
but Mafia-run settlements in rural Sicily show mercilessiv mgzr-
ous geometry.

This age-old cancer, with such illustrious remissions 25 medie-
val civilization and country villages. can be extizpatec ory with
an iron will. Architects are so influenced by inrumer ara aniics.
geometry that it seems “natural” and ‘spentanecus
They know no other language. And this ancestra. ai
ished by the very tools of design: T-squares. compasses. Grafting
machines. They serve to draw parallel lines. parale: wals parace.
rooms, parallel streets, and ght-angies intersect ie
perfectly enclosed in rectangles and p

iN

~
LQ

we 5 s ter A ~s ee ——

TISM™MS. 2 WOT!S €235LW AGT

under guard by rifle or machine gun. Co fins pack2ge lorpses
but being trapezoidal in form they are Ceser to the smare oF
their contents. Living men do not even have that concession

They are cynically boxed in abstract and inorgaric forms

At the end of the Middle Ages the taste for r
regular geometry, which coincided emblemanca::
for liberty pure and simple, disappeared Buildings ike the Palarz>
Vecchio in Florence and groups ef buildings ike these in Sier:
and Perugia look today like something from cuter s
day architects could not design them: the languzzge thes se Wi
not let them. To re-educate architects. T-squares must ber
along with compasses and all the equipment that is 1ga curt as
a function of the grammar and syntax of ciassica: architecture

mt
ie
,
i
ot
r
f
my
a]
Cs
4

:
y aieo ora +
Wt ad -

ees =

‘ry
tv
ts
ad)
rr
4
,
"

’

Antigeometry and free form, and therefore asymmetry and anti-
parallelism, are invariables of the modern language of architecture.
They mark emancipation through dissonance.

Schoenberg wrote that dissonance should not be considered a
piquant seasoning for tasteless sounds. Dissonances are logical
components of a new organism that has the same vitality as the
prototypes of the past. Schoenberg discovered that music freed
from a tonic, or a harmonic center, was fully comprehensible
and capable of evoking emotions. Tonality stands for symmetry,
proportion, consonance, and geometry. Too many architects have
not yet learned this lesson.

7. It would be extremely difficult to represent a medieval urban layout (for exam-
ple, Siena’s Piazza del Campo) using T-squares, compasses, and drafting machines
These tools are good only for boxy architecture, which can easily be represented
In perspective.

Antiperspective Three-Dimensionality

The hecatomb took place in the early fifteenth century. It was
the triumph of perspective. Architects stopped working concretely
on architecture and limited themselves to designing it. The dam-
ages were enormous; they have increased through the following
centuries; and they continue to proliferate with industrialized
building techniques. There is probably nothing comparable in
other areas of human activity. An almost unbridgeable chasm
has opened up between architects and architecture. It is no wonder
that quite a few architects have no idea what architecture is.

. Perspective is a drawing technique for representing three-di-
mensional objects on a two-dimensional surface. To make the
job easier, buildings were broken down into squared parts and
reduced to regular prisms. An immense visual heritage of curves,
asymmetric forms, swerving lines, modulations, and angles other
than 90-degree was obliterated in one fell swoop. The world was
turned into boxes, and the architectural “orders’’ were used to
distinguish superimposed or juxtaposed parts of the box.

What perspective should have done was provide a means of
acquiring greater awareness of three-dimensionality. Instead it
rigidified three-dimensionality to such a degree that drawing it
has become something mechanical and almost useless. It is a
symptomatic proof of what linguists maintain: it is not we who
speak a language; it is language that “speaks us.” We cannot
even think without a code. The perspective-based revival of clas-
sicism drastically impoverished the architectural language. Instead
of inventing spaces for human life, packages were designed. With

perspective, it was no longer architecture but its container that
was dominant.

In theory, perspective should have provided an instrument to
enhance depth. It might have expected to enrich the representation
of volumes by the use of dramatic foreshortening. To that end,
the corner view of a building should have become the driving
force in order to pull it out of isolation and bring it into close
relationship with the urban environment. Take, for instance, the
Palazzo Farnese in Rome. It is a box, and it could not be anything
else with the language of perspective. Yet its walls, if oblique,
might have led the eye off in a series of dynamic vistas. Of course
the palace’s corners would have been totally different. The one
facing the square should have been a clarion note, while the others
would have been muted to maintain the smooth flow of streets.

Obviously, nothing of the sort was done. The Farnese Palace
does not communicate any stereometric reality. It is broken up
into a main facade, heavy flanks on the small side streets, and
an almost independent second facade at the rear. The volume
is self-contained, finished, and lacking in any interplay with its
surroundings. It looks as if it had been catapulted into the square,
and the only way it can be appreciated as a three-dimensional
object is from the air. The facades have identical corners, the
hara-kiri of perspective.

Although perspective was introduced in the name of three-
dimensionality, it was usually applied to central framing, that
is, two-dimensionally. Look at any Renaissance or classical street:
a fissure between building walls and a procession of flat fagades.
Where has three-dimensionality gone? Where are the volumes?
What sense was there in destroying the glorious heritage of medie-
val architecture, which was full of stereometric unboxed mes-
sages? Consider political and social history, and you will find
an answer.

As with geometry, there would seem to be little hope of con-
quering the virus of perspective that has infected the body of
architecture in its most intimate fiber. In this case, however, the
modern code has deep roots that go right back to the fifteenth
century. From Mannerism on, art has tended to overmaster per-
spective vision, and avant-garde movements from Impressionism

8. The three-dimensional quality of Rome’s Palazzo Farnese would have been
enhanced if the building had been set at an angle to the square /abgve/. Instead
it appears as a two-dimensional wall (cenéer/. In designing the Piazza del Campido-
glio, Michelangelo rejected parallelism and traditional perspective (below, left) and
turned the perspective trapezoid upside down (right.

to Art diforme! have speeded up the process. Architecture has lag-
ged behind painting and sculpture: perspective has been more
refractory, and it still corrupts an infinite number of buildings
that are otherwise modern. A little knowledge of history is suffi-
cient to realize that all true architects have been fighting perspec-
tive since the crisis of 1527. It is time to bring the battle to an
end.

At the close of the fifteenth century there was Biagio Rossetti,
the man who laid out Ferrara, “the first modern European city,”
as Jacob Burckhardt called it. Rossetti was not a famous artist,
and that is why he understood the fundamental needs of a city,
something the yreat architects did not grasp because they were
involved with a science of optics that centered almost exclusively
on single buildings. What was the discovery made by this modest
craftsman who created Ferrara without even making drawings?
Simply that if buildings have to belong to a context, they must
not be symmetrical, self-sufficient, or finished-looking. The corner
views are the keynotes that set the tone of any townscape. The
rest comes by itself. In laying out the Addiction Froulea, the expan-
sion of the Ferrara city area, Rossetti concentrated on the buildings
at street intersections and emphasized their corners. This is the
only Renaissance urban complex thought out in terms of con-
cretely three-dimensional perspective. Yet three and a half centu-
ries later, Baron Haussmenn’s Paris was conceived in terms of
fagades, not corners.

Michelangelo was another extraordinary man who defied cen-
tral perspective. In the piazza of the Campidoglio he scorned
the prevailing code, yrasped the space and held it firm, violating
the canons of elementary geometry. He turned a rectangle into
a trapezoid that was the obverse of the perspective trapezoid,
and he negated the parallelism of the two palaces flanking the
square, even though they are identical, It was an incredible
achievement, but its message was ignored. Michelangelo is the
most famous genius in the history of art. His works are admired,
measured, and copied. In Montreal there is a half-scale copy of
St. Peter’s. The Campidoglio is an obligatory stop on the itinerary
of millions of tourists and of all cultivated architects. But how
many of them, reassured by this explosive precedent, have had

the courage to arrange two facing structures in nonparallel
fashion?

Let us make passing reference to another overwhelming work
of Michelangelo, the 1529 drawings for the fortifications of Flor-
ence. There is an unheard-of thrust of spaces within and without
these walls, with embankments and ramparts driving into the
surrounding landscape. There are no parallel lines in these struc-
tural profiles, twisting and turning in their function of static resist-
ance against the double thrust of aggressive spaces. For four centu-
ries no one has ever looked at these drawings, no one has
“discovered” them, although they were perfectly well known.
In terms of architectural language, of a new and revolutionary
code, no use was ever made of them. Why?

Michelangelo’s idiom was never formalized, so no one could
speak it. What was worse, no one could understand what Mi-
chelangelo was saying. Thus, his lesson was wasted. Let me repeat,
the codification of the modern language of architecture is the
sine qua non if one is to speak architecture today or understand
the true meaning of works of the past that have been counterfeited
by classicist interpretation. This is the crux of the matter. Modern
architecture coincides with the modern way of looking at the
architecture of the past. One can write in a new key if one can
read in a new key, and vice versa. This makes the contemporary
language an instrument of formidable power even in terms of
historiography.

One might object: if the classical language is the only one that
has been codified, how is it possible to communicate in an anticlas-
sical idiom? Verbal languages do not undergo such sudden and
radical revolutions that you find yourself speaking one way today
and another tomorrow. Furthermore, how can we establish a new
architectural code on the scanty basis of a few works by some
artists who, among other things, often accepted symmetry, geo-
metrical schemes, consonance, and perspective systems? Is it not
simply a pipe dream?

No. The modern language of architecture was not born sud-
denly in 1859 with William Morris’ Red House. It does not use
incomprehensible codes. Its messages are widely anticipated in
Eclecticism, the Baroque, and the Renaissance itself, as we have

seen, as well as the epic works of the Middle Ages, the late Roman
period, Greece (the real Hellenic world, not the one defiled by
Beaux-Arts hermeneutics), and as far back as the paleolithic age.
Although the only formalized code is that of classicism, we are
not powerless against it. The facts of history are on our side,
for we know that there is not a single monument of the past

9 Once an architect has a T-square in his hand, he can no longer think architec -
ture, He can only think about drawing it It is the perspective language that
beyins “speaking him” [t forces him to design in terms of boxes and prismatic
orders piled on top of cach other, whether they be Renaissance palaces ar the
grotesque “Square Colosseum” ain the Fascist FUR quarter of Rome

that obeys the classical code, and not even one Greek temple
has the proportions institutionalized in the abstract idea of the
“Greek temple.” The so-called “classical” civilizations were not
classical at all, not by a long shot. The great masters whose works
provided the basis for the classical code would be the first to
deny itin practice. Was Bramante classical? Was Palladio classical?
Was Vignola a true classicist?

The fact that Wright, Le Corbusier, Gropius, Mies van der
Rohe, Aalto, and other masters of the modern movement have
sometimes adopted classical elements (usually removing them
from their classical context, however) is not disturbing. The new
language of architecture, which developed in dialectical opposi-
tion to Beaux-Arts idolatry, had to take the enemy’s strategy
into account. The relationship between the two is somewhat simi-
lar to that between the Italian language and Latin (although mod-
ern architecture is not at all derived from classicism). In the first
centuries of our era, the vernacular was mixed with Latin words,
and Latin was “corrupted” by vulgar terms. As time went on,
Latin became progressively less Latin, and the structure of the
code was vulgar. Latin came back into fashion in the fifteenth
century, at the same time that perspective appeared and for similar
reasons. The code of literary Latin was revived and seemed to
prevail. But in that very moment it committed suicide, because
the operation was antihistorical, repressive, and absurd.

ESN
=~
WS

>

10. Erich Mendelsohn’s sketch for a movie industry (1917). On the top right,
three helicoidal bodies similar to the Guggenheim Museum by Frank Lloyd Wright.
Mendelsohn’s images do not use the Cubist four-dimensionality, but they exalt
the principle of movement through corner visions and dynamic materials.

Have modern masters built some symmetrical and perspective
buildings? A distinction must be made. When Gropius, Mies,
and Aalto produced them, it was an act of surrender. Lacking a
modern code, they weakened and regressed to the familiar womb
of classicism. The same thing did not happen to Mendelsohn.
His expressionism is so violent that the three-dimensional per-
spective block destroys any static solemnity and explodes, electri-
fies, and magnetizes the landscape. Where are the symmetrical
buildings by Le Corbusier? Does the Villa Savoye look symmetri-
cal? Perhaps to someone who has only glanced at it in a photo-
graph. And Wright’s works are even less symmetrical.

Finally, must we really acknowledge that perspective is one
of the thousand alternatives possible? Fine, so long as it is chosen
out of a thousand possibilities, after the advantages of the other
nine hundred and ninety-nine have been examined, and not a
priori.

The Syntax of Four-dimensional Decomposition

De Stijl theory, the only coherent attempt to draw up a code
for modern architecture, offered a rigorous procedure that could
be applied generally. If the problem is to get rid of the perspective
block, the first thing to do is eliminate the third dimension by
decomposing the box, breaking it up into panels. No more closed
volumes. What happens to a room? It is no longer a cubic void.
There are six plans: the ceiling, four walls, and the floor. Separate
the joinings, keeping the planes free; then light will penetrate
even the darkest corners of the room, and its space will take
on new life. A simple operation no one had thought of before,
yet it was a decisive step on the way to architectural emancipation.
The interior space is still somewhat cubical, but it looks com-
pletely different with this sort of lighting.

Let us follow this line of inquiry. Once the plans are separate
and independent, they can be extended beyond the perimeter
of the old box and spread out, go up or down, and reach beyond
the limits that used to cut off the interior from the exterior. House
and city can be transformed, Mondrian fashion, into a panorama
of blue, yellow, red, white, and black panels. Once the box has
been dismembered, the planes no longer form closed volumes,
containers of finite spaces. Instead the rooms become fluid and
join up and flow in a moving continuum. The static quality of
classicism is replaced by a dynamic vision, with the element of
time added or, if you will, with a fourth dimension.

There was enough in De Stijl theory to nourish the language
of architecture for decades. It would have been an easy step from
planes to curved and wavy surfaces and free forms, with a wealth

> i |

s

ye TA Esa gh

11. The box encloses, confining one like a coffin /above/, But if we separate the
box’s six planes, we have performed the revolutionary act of modern architecture
‘second row!. The panels can be lengthened or shortened to vary the light in fluid
spaces “Aird rows, Once the box has been broken up, the spaces can perform
their functions in total freedom shelow/

of alternative passages from space to space. But architects did
not understand this neoplastic code, and so they abandoned it
without having fully explored its possibilities.

Nevertheless, decomposition remains a substantial invariable
of the modern idiom. In the Bauhaus complex in Dessau, for
example, Gropius broke up the volume into three distinct units:
the dormitory, the school, and the workshop. Programmatically
dissonant blocks are thus linked together in defiance of perspec-
tive. There is no vantage point from which you can grasp the
whole. You have to walk around. Hence movement, hence time.
It is still, as always, a question of inventorying functions. Once
the compact box is destroyed, the functional components can
be distinguished, and their messages become more specific and
direct. Harmonic connections are rejected. The passages between
the three blocks look crude and brutal to emphasize their
dissonance.

Gropius only half understood what De Stijl was up to, and
he did not break up volumes into panels. Other architects only
half understood what had been done at the Bauhaus. The practice
of breaking up volumes into smaller functional units was widely
adopted, especially in school buildings, where it is easy to separate
the classroom block from the gymnasium and the offices. But
generally there is an attempt to “harmonize” the three units, to
make them reciprocally “proportional” and to link them up with
“assonant” transitions—in short, to classicize the anticlassical.
How can one explain that dissonance is as fundamental to modern
architecture as it is to modern music? It is what gives forms,
words, and sounds their specific meaning and makes expressive"
the inventory of functions. Yet no sooner do architects get the
wrapping off than they start putting it back on again. When
the classroom block, the gymnasium, and the office body are
“composed” harmoniously, we are back with perspective vision
again, with a privileged vantage point.

The mania of proportion is another tumor that needs to be
cut out. What is proportion? It is.a device to establish a binding
relationship between heterogeneous parts of a building. It is a
neurotic longing for “synthesis,” preferably a priori. But if the
parts are different and carry specific messages, why unify them

12. The decomposition of the volume block into functional prisms was carried
out in the Monastery of San Filippo Neri in Rome, designed by Francesco Borro-
mini ‘adore, and in Walter Gropius’ Bauhaus at Dessau séelous Ludwig Mies van
der Rohe, in Barcelona, broke the volume up into free panels sett. center).

through proportion and reduce the number of messages to one?
Fear of freedom, of growth, and therefore of life. Any time you
see a “proportioned” building, beware! Proportion freezes the
vital process and masks falsity and waste.

Mies van der Rohe is perhaps the outstanding exponent of
De Stijl. His German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exposition of 1929
is a masterpiece of this architectural trend. It consists of panels
in travertine and marble, glass sheets, water surfaces, horizontal
and vertical planes that shatter the immobility of closed spaces,
break through volumes, and give direction to exterior vistas. This
pavilion was only a beginning, with all its planes at right angles
to each other. The system could have been enriched by getting
away from the right angle and moving along inclined planes.
But the pavilion was the beginning and the end. Four-dimensional
decomposition became a plaything, a mindless exercise suitable
for designing balconies, awnings, and some furnishings.

For clarity’s sake, let us digress for a moment. The modern
code is applicable in any situation, on any scale, from a chair
to a highway cluster, from a spoon to a city. An architect should
not refuse any challenge. If he waits for the ideal commission
before “‘speaking”’ correctly, he has already given up his profes-
sion. Take a room, for example, even the most traditional and
anachronistic one. Let us start by painting its surfaces six different
colors: yellow, red, blue, white, black, and another color for the
floor. Is it still the same room? Now let us change the color ar-
rangement: make the ceiling black, and the walls blue, red, white,
and yellow. The dark ceiling pressing down will make the room
seem broader. If you want more light, the wall facing the window
will be white or yellow. If you want less light, that wall can be
painted blue or red, or even black. And let us paint the rectangular
areas over windows and doors right up to the ceiling, so that
they become sections of the wall instead of holes. And why not
use lines? All it takes is a diagonal stroke to dynamize a surface.
Nowadays supergraphic design is within everybody’s reach.

One might object that these are cosmetic operations. Certainly
they are, but cosmetics can be a corrective and a protest. The
classical code is shot through with cosmetic expedients, from use-
less colonnades to fake windows. The modern code uses cosmetics

as a provocation, to point out the burning need for a new treat-
ment of space.

Moreover, modern cosmetics are neither costly nor wasteful,
while the old cosmetics—what with symmetry, proportion, and
marble facing—are prohibitively expensive. Consider the nine-
teenth-century Palazzo della Regina Margherita on the Via Veneto
in Rome. Conceived in classical terms, it needed a majestic ‘‘full-
ness’ on top, to make the cornice dominant. So an entire floor
was built for this sole purpose, a floor that could not be lived
in because there were no windows. Isn’t that disgraceful? After
World War II, the Americans bought the building for the United
States Embassy. They found that there was a top floor and wanted
to put it to use, so they cut a series of small windows in the
cornice. Double madness: a “‘royal’” embassy with affectations
of efficiency. The modern language of architecture could not build
or even design such a building, much less something like the
Victor Emmanuel Monument. The modern language was born
with social. psychological, and human aims, and it abhors pomp-
ous display and superstructures. Classical architecture is very ex-
pensive because it is symbolic. It must assert itself and suffocate
the citizen.

The method of decomposition is an invariable. The seventh
invariable, the principle of reintegration, means something only
if it is the result of prior decomposition. Otherwise it is not reinte-
gration but merely a priori classical integration.

The fourth invariable was not a 1917 discovery of the Dutch
De Stijl group. Consider the San Filippo Neri Monastery in Rome.
Borromini designed this enormous block in the seventeenth cen-
tury He broke it up into sections that are functional in terms
of both interior spaces and cityscape. It has a concave front that
pulls in the outside world. To the left is a supreme corner, perhaps
the most highly elaborated angle in the history of architecture,
leading seductively into a small side street. Facing onto it is a
long opaque wall with almost casual, dissonant windows. But
at the end of the street the Piazza dell’Orologio seems to urge
the building to send up its tower and tease the sky with linear,
wrought-iron arabesques. Truly, the “modern” structures of the
past overshadow the classical ones. Lite has always decomposed,

articulated, added, or subtracted. Delacroix said that a straight
line does not exist. Scientists tell us that symmetry is not a law
of nature. Likewise, classicism does not exist in architecture, only
in Beaux-Arts manuals and buildings that are copied out of them.

13) Fight sketches to dlustrate a lecture by Frank Lloyd Wright on the involvement
ot every architectural element in the structural scheme Ae the Kaufmann
House. Falling Water. at Bear Run, Pennsylvania (1930-39), which incorporates
all seven invartables of the modern language of architecture

Cantilever, Shell, and Membrane Structures

“Now I shall try to show you why organic architecture is the
architecture of democratic freedom. . . . Here—say—is your box:
big hole in the box, little ones if you wish—of course. What
you see of it now is this square package of containment. You
see? Something not fit for our liberal profession of democratic

government, a thing essentially anti-individual. ... I knew
enough of engineering to know that the outer angles of a box
were not where its most economical support would be. . . . No,

a certain distance in each way from each corner is where the
economic support of a box-building is invariably to be found.
You see? Now, when you put support at those points you have
created a short cantileverage to the corners that lessens actual
spans and sets the corner free or open for whatever distance you
choose. The corners disappear altogether if you choose to let space
come in there, or let it go out. Instead of post and beam construc-
tion, the usual box building, you now have a new sense of building
construction by way of the cantilever and continuity. Both are
new structural elements as they now enter architecture. But ali
you see of this radical liberation of space all over the world today,
is the corner window. But, in this simple change of thought lies
the essential of the architectural change from box to free plan
and the new reality that is space instead of matter. . . . Let’s go
on. These unattached side walls become something independent,
no longer enclosing walls. They’re separate supporting screens,
any one of which may be shortened, or extended or perforated,
or occasionally eliminated. . . . freedom where before imprison-
ment existed. You can perfect a figure of freedom with these

four screens; in any case, enclosure as a box is gone... . To go
further: if this liberation works in the horizontal plane why won’t
it work in the vertical plane? No one has looked through the
box at the sky up there at the upper angle, have they? Why
not? Because the box always had a cornice at the top... . Now

. . you catch no sense of enclosure whatever at any angle, top
or sides... . Space may now go out or come in where life is
being lived, space as a component of it’’ (Frank Lloyd Wright,
An American Architecture, ed. Edgar Kaufman [New York: Horizon
Press, 1955], pp. 76~78). Wright anticipated De Stijl syntax and
got to the heart of the problem by way of analyzing structures.

It is elementary reasoning to place the supports a certain dis-
tance in from the corners. Even a child can understand it. But
how many architects can? Look around you. Millions of supports
are put up at the corners, cagelike structures hemming in space.
And what about engineers? With few exceptions, they are victims
of classical prejudices and make things symmetrical and propor-
tionate. Indeed, the history of engineering is brimful of compro-
mise. A striking example is the Eiffel Tower in Paris. The four
large arches at its base look as if they were meant to support
the structure, but they are false. The famous French engineer
could not face the “‘scandal’”’ of building the tower in its true
structural form, with four shafts meeting at the top. He had to
respect classical “static vision,’ even denying reality. Thus he
installed a large heavy beam, serving no purpose, on all four
sides and hung the arches on them. The arches are supported,
but they look as if they were doing the supporting. Classicists
were satisfied with this typically wasteful act.

The codification of the modern language of architecture implies
that engineers as well as architects must shuck the chains of classi-
cism and bring to an end the long conflict between technique
and expression, which must be used together in a creative fashion.

Take a prestigious international figure like Pier Luigi Nervi.
He produced a masterpiece in the Orbetello hangars, with their
magnificent enclosed space, arching volumes, and corner elements
that project the structure into the landscape. His Turin Exhibition
Hall had splendid modules, but they are repeated in the traditional
way and could not be carried through to the end walls. To finish

14. Modern structures. 44ce- section of the underground automobile showroom
in Turin, by Riccardo Morandi, a dirigible towing a skyscraper, by Buckminster
Fuller. Centr: three hyperbolic paraboloids, by Felix Candela; nyt: skin mem-
branes, by Eduardo Terroja. Seiew. Frei Otto's membranes.

them off, an awful apse was built with pseudostructural decorative
elements. Nervi’s Palazzo del Lavoro in Turin is a thankless large
box, with reinforced concrete columns complete with fluting and
steel capitals. All it would take to turn it into an Egyptian temple
are colossal statues of pharaohs. To comment on his papal audi-
ence hall in the Vatican would be superfluous. And the most
that can be said of that round cake, the Palazzo dello Sport in
Rome, is that it is right at home in the Fascist EUR complex
designed by Marcello Piacentini, the Italian Albert Speer. The
Palazzetto dello Sport in Viale Tiziano is certainly better, but
what is that circle of fork-shaped elements that supports the
dome? A circular ring of prestressed reinforced concrete, the real
structural link of the whole organism, is hidden underground.
And what is one to think of this mania for domes? The symbolism
of the dome is associated with godhead, idols, absolute monarch-
ies, temple shrines, and dictatorial states. Psychologically, the
dome involves security or its counterfeit because it is the classic
form par excellence, completely closed and symmetrical. Nervi
did not draw inspiration from the anticlassical domes of Hagia
Sophia in Istanbul or Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence, but from
the Pantheon, and he executed a series of tours de force to reduce
the thickness of the shell. Where the Pantheon piles up matter,
Nervi throws open a row of windows. Nevertheless, the space
is still blocked, and there is no interplay with the world outside.
The security to be found in the shadow of classical idols is simply
fear decked out in fancy trappings.

What happened to Nervi after the Orbetello hangars? Did his
creative streak run dry? Suffice it to look at the Burgo paper
plant in Mantua and countless details of the buildings mentioned
above to see that it did not. The reason is simpler and much
more alarming. When Nervi speaks architecture, he speaks Latin,
the classical code that exhausts most structural engineers. How
many are immune from it? Riccardo Morandi for one, especially
in his underground automobile showroom in Turin; Buckminster
Fuller, with his air-transportable geodesic domes and extremely
lightweight skyscrapers; Eduardo Torroja, with his Madrid Race-
course vaults; Félix Candela with his hyperbolic paraboloids; Frei
Otto with his transparent tensilstructures; and quite a few young

men who are slowly sloughing off the classical code, particularly
in their shell and membrane, or plastic and compressed air, cover-
ings. Architecture and engineering come together in these “tents,”
where space forms, and is formed by, the structures.

The structural invariable of the modern idiom is less concerned
with cantilevers, membranes, and shells than it is with involving
all the architectural elements in a symphony of static forces. It
is well known that a structure’s efficiency depends on its form
and the tension of its curves. But how many people take this
principle into consideration? In an ordinary balcony, it is only
the slab that does the structural work, not the railing or parapet;
hence, waste.

But look at the astonishing Falling Water house. The cantile-
vered terrace seemed so precarious to the workmen that they
refused to take down the scaffolding for fear that the whole thing
would collapse. Wright pulled down the scaffolding himself. Even
in structural engineering he spoke the modern language. He
proved his worth in works that “sensible’’ people and academi-
cians considered mad and suicidal.

In the building field, science is still in an antediluvian slumber.
Enormous transatlantic liners can float on water, while city build-
ings are made inordinately heavy just to stand on the ground.
A considerable patrimony of structural experiences is not drawing
interest. Sergio Musmeci said: “The lack of technological foresight
is responsible for the present crisis in architecture and is keeping
it from becoming truly modern. History must be brought up to
date by making a leap out of the past and into the future. The
problem of creating forms for the future can be postponed no
longer.”

15. Wavy surface design by the computer of the Aerospace Division of the Boeing
Company. This shape would be almost impossible to design with the architect’s
traditional tools: T-square, compasses, drafting machines. Computers can suggest
new fonms to enrich the lexicon, grammar, and syntax of architecture.

lo Drawings produced by the computer of the Airplane Division of the Boeing
Company. They show how to depict the same object from different points of
view by using computer-directed simulators With this sort of technical support,
imaginative architectural designs can be verified at once from all sides.

Is this utopian? Not at all. It is simply an appeal to use electronic
computers to solve structural and technological problems, includ-
ing service installations, with a speed and exactitude that were
unattainable before. Computers are becoming more and more
popular. In a few years perhaps the structural engineer as we
know him, immersed in mysterious but rough calculations, will
disappear. We will have slender, lightweight, prefabricated, and
portable buildings. We may no longer “go to work” and “come
home.” Perhaps we shall just press a button, and home or office,
suspended from a helicopter, may come to us, settling down wher-
ever we like.

The technological revolution coincides with the revolution in
architectural language. Computers make it possible to simulate
reality, not in the unilateral way perspective drawing does, but
in all its visual and behavioral aspects. We can check the space
of a room, its size, light, heating, and fluency. The simulator
will instantly draw plans, sections, elevations; it will walk us
through a building or a city; and it will be possible to compare
an infinite number of alternate solutions. Obviously it will not
guarantee that architects speak the modern language, but it will
offer them the possibility of doing so, a possibility that has hith-
erto been limited by the very instruments of design, T-squares
and compasses. What is more, computers will make the design

17. The architect of the future (cartoon in AJA journal). He describes his idea to
a secretary, who feeds the information to a computer. The machine goes to work,
and a robot builds the three-dimensional structure.

process democratic. The client will be able to follow the develop-
ment of his house step by step. He will ‘see’ it and “live” it
before it is built. He will be able to make choices and change
the house. The breach that has separated the architect from archi-
tecture, at least since the Renaissance, will finally be closed, as
will the breach between space and its structural shell.

Space in Time

The history of architecture is marked by chances missed, giant
steps forward, and long falls backward. Michelangelo took a giant
step forward; everyone praised him, but no one followed where
he led. Borromini leaped forward; he was ostracized during his
lifetime and dismissed after his death. Constructivism marked a
major advance after the October Revolution, but Stalin, good
classicist that he was, froze the movement. Wright burst forth,
but where are the traces of his work in our present panorama?

It is easy to understand why so many give up the battle. It is
hard to escape from the academic womb. At best, compromise
is achieved, and that is even worse. An architect who said, “I
want to speak ancient Greek” would probably be considered mad,
but he would actually be less demented than those who uncon-
sciously speak an ungrammatical version of ancient Greek, igno-
rant of its vocabulary and syntax. Only one architect of our time
sought and found architecture in ancient Greece. And he discov-
ered it for himself, without the blinders of the Beaux-Arts school.
That man was Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, who changed his name
to Le Corbusier after his baptism in Greek waters. The only way
to speak ancient Greek would be to formulate the invariables
of the language: antiperspective, no alignment or parallelism of
volumes, ban on symmetry (in the name of the Propylaea), and
a veto on classicism (in the name of the Erechtheum). Are these
not the invariables of modern architecture? Of course, and the
only way to get free of perspective conditioning is to go back
to preperspective civilizations, usually to the Middle Ages but
in Le Corbusier’s case to Greece. Take Hadrian’s Villa in Tivoli,

A?

IR Closed spaces aomenhir a pyramid and a Greek teniple cacne Statie interior
spaces the Pantheon and the Temple ot Minerva Medica in Rome snc one
Spaces tomove through the Acropolis Athens Hadrian s Villa Tivoli, catacombs.
Rome ceed sn Palee Chistian one die tenal movement Goethe two-direa-
bonal movement Baroque movement Pragca del Quirinale Rome Ado

for example. Does it speak the classical language or something
diametrically opposite, with its hinged blocks swinging around
and reaching out to the landscape? The idea of “the classical
world” is a meaningless abstraction. Paradoxical as it may seem,
“classical” civilization was almost totally anticlassical.

Space in time is the summary of the problem in a nutshell. It
took man thousands of years to master architectural space. The
time element in architecture was experienced for only a short
and exceptional period, that of the catacombs. It will take centu-
ries, perhaps thousands of years, for man to master the dynamic
principle of space in time.

The only way to become modern is by reliving the stages of
past history inside oneself. Before the Pantheon there were no
interior spaces created by man. There were empty, unfilled voids
and left-over, negative cavities. Primitive man was afraid of space.
His monument was the menhir, an upright “long stone,” a “full-
ness” in the endless wastes. The ancient East produced a number
of solids, like the pyramids and temples with hypostyle halls,
where space was driven out by enormous columns. The Greek
temple humanized volume, but it continued to ignore space. The
idea of using nontactile reality as an architectural instrument was
first put into practice in the Pantheon. But its space is timid,
hemmed in by gigantic walls and lacking contact with the outside.
It is lighted only by a single oculus at the top, which heightens
the chiaroscuro of the coffered dome and confirms that this is
solid heavy matter. A few centuries went by before man was
ready for the interplay of inner spaces and outside landscape.
This did not happen until late antiquity, with the so-called Temple
of Minerva Medica in Rome. And the idea of continuous flow
between inner and outer space was only made concrete a thousand
years later, in the Gothic cathedrals.

There was a period in which the physical world was considered
a place of damnation, and a life after death was hypothesized.
Man lived for the hereafter and scorned terrestrial values. Space
was repressed. Endless hypogeal tunnels for the dead were dug
beneath the static, theatrically monumental architecture of ancient
Rome. The element of time thus came into its own with the
birth of this architecture-to-move-through. The catacombs were

only moved through they did not lead anvevhere. It was the
Biblaal approaeh in a metaphyetoal and transcendental key, an
wchitecture of suride This was a short lived experience in his-
tory As the Church became wordiy it came to terms with admin-
istrative and politreal authority: The element of time encountered
the Greco Roman sense of space Movement was preserved along
the length of the Clirtistian basilica trom narthex to apse, but
columns and walls on both sides of the nave were organized in
classical fashion. wath a single axial motion line. Only in the
Goothie cathedral was something more complex achieved. in the
contrast between two tines of motion the length of the church,
Which can be moved through physically: and a vertical course
matkings an ideal passaze heavenw ard

The time element was constricted in the Renatssance. Pure space
prevailed again along wath the self-sutticrent object and the cen-
tral plan building The turrous battle over St) Peter's Basilica in
Rome was concerned with stasis and movement. Reformation
and Counter Retermation Michelangelo's scheme was butchered
to make room tera theatreal plan: Borromini revived Michelange-
lo’s ideaoin the church of Sant Agnese in the Piazza Navona,
and in Sant ive alla Sapienza he showed that the impossible
Was possible that a centralized space could be truly dynamic.
this truumphant shout died out without an echo

The Bibhioal concept of lite amphes movement and change. The
Greee Roman concept invelyes statre space Phe Christian Church
struck a dubious balance between the two There was multidiree-
hhonal movement tn the plan of Pope Sixtus Rome and in the
laveut of Baroque cities Then came the neoclassical freeze.

The sixth invariable ot the modern linguage is space in time,
space thats truly lived ino ready toe act and be acted on. When
the tirst tive invartables are caught up by space in time, they
aequire new substance Functional listing is the premise. Asymme-
trv and dissonance are indispensable features. because a symme-
trival building makes movement useless, all vou can do is stand
still and leok at it) Antiperspective is another consequence of

ti
ia nM
wiht

Ml

=.

ms
ik:

a

19. Architecture without buildings. The architect must study human functions

without worrying about how to box them in /adove’. He must avoid forcing them
into single boxes or series of regular prisms (center/, The modern language of
architecture adapts spaces to human functions and movements (below.

space in time. because it means constantly Changing the viewing
point Decomposition and projecting structures are instruments

for adding the time element to architecture. They break up the
box and bite its corners.

How can time be introduced into space? One way was pointed
out by Louis Kahn. He distinguished between spaces to move
through and spaces created for “arrivals” at the end of movement.
Anyone who conceives of a corridor with parallel walls, that is
as a static prism, does not know the first thing about architecture.
Even the arrival spaces—living room, study, or bedroom—should
not be totally static. They must foster human communication,
intellectual tension, or waking after sleep. Life is always full of
happenings. The dynamism of living needs to be mediated but
not reduced to zero. A room is entered, crossed, and left, and
all this movement should be considered and provided for in de-
sign. What is the ‘free plan,” the principle of flexibility, moving
partitions, and fluidity from space to space? It is another way
of expressing space in time and time in space. The volume of
Villa Saveye, in Poissy, is slashed from ground to roof garden
by a ramp that is visible throughout the house. Le Corbusier
called it promenade architecturale, architecture to walk through.

Staircases are certainly moved through, but too many of them
are caged in vertical tubes. In the Swiss Pavilion of the University
of Paris, the staircases emerge from the volume and a “‘free-hand”’
curved wall caresses them. A more advanced example is the stair-
cases in Aalto’s dormitories at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge, which are continuous with the corri-
dors in order to form serpentine volumes and spaces. And what
about the famous building that is all passageway and ramp? The
Guyyenheim Museum in New York is that kind of structure,
an extrovert helical prowrernade.

Norris Kelly Smith maintains that Wright introduced Biblical
thought into the field of architecture for the first time, after two
thousand years of domination by Greco-Roman concepts. It was
easier for Wright to escape from classicism because he turned
down a Beaux-Arts education. He hated big cities, bureaucratic
institutions, authority, and power, and kept intact the proud indi-
vidualism of the pioneers. At Taliesin, Wisconsin, and Taliesin
West, Arizona, he lived close to nature and experienced and stud-
ied time How, indeed, could you think of building a house over

a waterfall if you did not have a vivid sense of fluid motion?
In the Guggenheim Museum a glass strip was wound around
the spiral, so that paintings and sculptures could receive a mixture
of natural and artificial light. The time element marks the trans-
ition from the city to the museum inside and vice versa. The
lighting of the interior space was to change tone every hour all
year round.

Where in architecture can time be introduced? Everywhere.
How can it be done? In countless ways. Take floors, for example.
Does it make sense to have the same kind of floor surface in
the hallway, the living room, the bathroom, the study, and the
bedroom? Should movement and kinetic experience be the same
in rooms with such different functions? Where could such an
inane rule have come from? Classicism, of course. What basis
could it have? Certainly not the so-called classical period, which
reveals a remarkable sense of movement: the Athenian Acropolis
is built on rough rocky terrain, kept that way in order to impose
slow, architecturally calculated motion. Every space should have
different flooring—hard, soft, gravelly, smooth or rough, oblique,
any kind as long as it is thought out. Einstein says that an event
is localized not only in time but also in space. This revolutionary
idea has yet to be assimilated by architecture. What it means is
the following invariable: open design that is constantly in process,
invested with time consciousness, and unfinished.

DO Frank liowd Wrebeotrom distin te reaptesration oo ¢4or. three dimen
New Yorn 1X34)

Nouseud

drawing ter the “farts and BRartor Houses on Buttale

single units are functionals articulated Alc.

York (is4o-s9)

aospiral turning cutward to the

the Geasyvenherm

sty

“

NN
we

Reintegration of Building, City, and Landscape

If listing functions is the first invariable of the modern code of
architecture, then reintegration is logically the last one. The five
invariables in between could be increased in number by passing
from the elementary level to an exhaustive analysis of the lexicon,
grammar, and syntax of architecture.

Inventorying functions breaks up the box, lists elements with-
out classifying them, and gives concrete new meaning to the indi-
vidual messages that classicism drowned in ‘‘orders” and se-
quences of proportions. The successive invariables reinforce the
listing operation by discarding the inviolable taboos of symmetry,
assonance, geometry, perspective, compact volumes, structural
comers, and space with no time component. Thus they also foster
a reintegration of the functions that have been listed. The ‘‘free
plan” by itself is a step on the road to reintegration, because it
postulates maximum communication and flow between rooms
and thereby unifies them. But this is not synthesis in the classic,
a priori sense. It is just the opposite, a matter of dynamic unity
that creates a movement and shapes space to time. True, you
move physically even in a classical building, but man always
has the impression of being out of place and incongruous there.
Those spaces were designed not for him, but for motionless stat-
ues, and they are as formal as tombs.

Adolf Loos explored the principle of vertical reintegration in
his Raumplan (an interlocking construct of spatial areas of differ-
ent heights) and enlarged the surface available for living, thereby
economizing and increasing artistic values. There is no reason

why the service area or the sleeping area cannot be lower than
gc

21 Raumplan and reintegration Accr the staggered levels break up the mechani-
cal superimposition of floors and provide each room with the functionally correct
height, without waste. Beiou an urban plan that brings collective and residential
structures into close contact with streets, parks, and transpurtation systems, taking
advantage of several levels

the living room. Anu we can use the differences in height to
create other usable spaces that are intimate, interesting, and acces-
sible in a few steps. For an example of the opposite principle,
take a symbol of Fascism, the Palazzo Littorio in Rome, completed
after the war as the seat of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The
bathroom ceilings are over twenty feet high, the same height as
those of the assembly halls. These imperial toilets are fit for fairy-
tale giants or Duces on fifteen-foot stilts. Instead, they are used
by little men who look sadly out of place there. They are another
example of classicist schizophrenia.

Our aim is horizontal and vertical reintegration, with passages
in any direction, not squared off at right angles but curving, obli-
que, and inclined. This principle goes well beyond the single object
and integrally links the building to the city. When the volume
has been broken up into planes and reassembled in four-dimen-
sional fashion, the traditional facade disappears, together with
the distinction between interior and exterior spaces and between
architecture and town planning. The fusion of city and building
leads to “urbatecture.”” No more building blocks alternating with
empty blocks for streets and plazas. Once the old weave is unrav-
eled, the landscape can be reintegrated. And when the traditional
dichotomy of city and countryside is abolished, urbatecture can
spread into whole territories, while nature penetrates the metro-
politan fabric. Thus continuity will be established between city
and region, instead of overcrowded, polluted, chaotic, and homi-
cidal urban communities on the one hand and desolate, unculti-
vated countryside on the other.

Is this utopian? Only in so far as it is still just an aspiration.
If it becomes a spoken language in design, in furnishings, in your
own room, in buildings of any size, in a city, and in its region,
it will acquire an overwhelming force. Architects and people inter-
ested in the human habitat will have at their disposal a revolution-
ary weapon, one that is actually explosive by virtue of architec-
ture. If we really speak the modern architectural language, there
are two possibilities facing us. Either we will be allowed to express
ourselves freely, or we will have to demolish the obstacles that
prevent us from doing so, we will have to fight censorship. Does
real-estate speculation gag free speech? Then we must combat

—_—_ |
-

Joba fe terre Pear ting te. rerpteyeation fbr "Auronnvens.

Theater, Cbd

Peart Car, Tie element are dad outoon the yrouid Co pbare oy Phen: eceones

pete Cape th ay fadbeweed bey trattie tubes (nen any

and hairy otaect fully opened te rt.

Sarreoundiny ss

atehieved

Dhue a city

it with a vigor that is commensurate with the importance of urba-
tectural language. But our cause will be weakened if, once the
use of land has been collectivized, nothing changes in terms of
architectural censorship, as was the case in Soviet Russia.

Obviously this last invariable has functional consequences too.
After having listed and decomposed the functions of buildings,
cities, and territories, we must rethink their relationships. Why
should a school be a self-contained structure instead of being
one with the social center, the local administrative offices, facto-
ries, professional studios, and residences? Is it right to separate
residential from recreational and commercial areas? Should we
not rather promote an interplay of functions? Take the case of
universities, which used to consist of several independent facul-
ties, each with its own classrooms, auditorium, and library. Inter-
disciplinary education has started breaking through this kind of
isolationism. Will universities continue to move outside the city,
like the traditional English and American campuses, or will they
be localized throughout the residential and working areas?

Streets must also be reintegrated. On several floors of the Unite
d’Habitation in Marseilles, Le Corbusier inserted stores, thus
reintegrating business and residence. He called these corridors
rues, veritable indoor streets. Why cannot streets run at the same
height as the tenth or fiftieth floor of the buildings, floating be-
tween skyscrapers and structuring the sky? Countless utopian
designs offer urban images of this kind, and a number of architec-
tural works foreshadow them in concrete fashion.

The offices of the Ford Foundation in New York look out onto
an inner covered park. A building on the Via Romagna in Rome
reintegrates commercial, administrative, and residential functions
by having stores, offices, and villas piled on top of each other.
The Mummers Theater in Oklahoma City is a construct of hetero-
geneous fragments, scrap metal, automobile wrecks, and tubes—
action architecture, as John Johansen’s sketches clearly show.
Montreal's Habitat ’67 is a cluster of cells that link up architectural
and urban spaces with streets on all levels. This structure could
be enlarged to accommodate schools, hospitals, plazas, gardens,
and parks; the sort of do-it-yourself architecture, flowing and
free from geometry, that Louis Kahn envisaged in his sketch.

Unless the population problem is to be solved by nuclear war,
macrostructures are urgently needed, but not terrifying macro-
structures. On the contrary, they should be human, comfortable,
and life-enhancing, with exciting spaces for collective activities
and intimate spaces for privacy.

Reintegration of city and region implies a dialogue between

taluneanil

\ “—
or’.
WN —
_ —_—
~——
230 Assembly of residential units at Habitat) 67) Montreal by Moshe Satdie
Tdecre two cartoons on Habitat bv Ting and Darneault Beda a sketch by Louis
Kahin be objected to the boxultke shapes of Satdie’s units and suggested that
they be assembled freely like leaves on a tree

architecture and its natural environment. Psychoanalysis and an-
thropology teach and warn us that man has lost some essential
values in his rise to civilization: the sense of the unity of space
and time, the freedom of nomadic life, the joy of aimless wander-
ing through unlimited horizons. We can and must recover these
values. The hippy communes and the revolt of the young against
consumer society, polluted cities, and repressive institutions are
symptoms of the urgent need to wipe the cultural slate clean.
But one makes a new start by moving forward, providing concrete
alternatives and using the modern language that can express them.
Otherwise one is mired in mere romantic protest, blocked at zero
degrees.

Again, let us think of some simple cases that can be easily
verified. The reader can make his own extrapolations on the urban
and territorial scale. What does reintegrating architecture and na-
ture mean? Walk into a cave or a natural grotto. It may once
have been the refuge for prehistoric man. You can feel the earth
beneath your feet, and you like the feeling. This sense of physical
pleasure has been lost on our asphalt streets and smooth side-
walks. The roof of the cave is not squared off at the sides; it is
continuous with the curving rough walls and runs right into the
earth floor. When light strikes the rocky masses or glances over
the vault of the cave, it creates stunning magical effects that
change hour after hour. And think about grottoes by the sea,
where the light picks up the color of the depths as it is reflected
by the water surface. The light moves with the waves, records
the sky, whether cloudy or calm, and communicates the shifting
of the winds. All these lost values can be rediscovered through
the modern language of architecture. In the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology chapel, Eero Saarinen illuminated the space
with a tremulous light reverberating off water. Despite controver-
sial opinions about its success, this solution is indicative of what
can be done. The reintegration of architecture and nature must
be carried out in a scientific, not a romantic way, on the basis
of anthropological, sociological, and psychoanalytical research.
The modern code demands it.

From listing functions to reintegration, there are seven invari-
ables that bear witness against idolatry, dogma, conventions, set

ve

fy

Past

That attermpt ta rercves

nn

aoitth

tape

sev greed toy JOP Jureyenaren

Pid Poout riage tute,

phrases, commonplaces, humanistic imprecision, and repressive-
ness, in whatever conscious or unconscious form these may ap-
pear. The new language “speaks us” straight out, without mystical
overtones, not only for the present and the future but all the
way back to prehistory. To borrow from Amold Schoenberg, the
modern language brings together the idea of Moses and the word
of Aaron.

Conclusion: Unfinished Architecture and Kitsch

It is worth comparing two modern theses, one expressed in the
iconoclastic appeal of Friedrich Hundertwasser and the other in
the mournful reflections of Saul Bellow’s Mr. Sammler.

Hundertwasser says in his “Manifesto for the Boycotting of
Architecture”: “Every man has the right to build the way he
wants. Architecture today is censored the same way painting is
in the Soviet Union. Everybody should be entitled to build his
own four walls and be responsible for them. Present-day architec-
ture is criminally sterile. The reason is that building stops when
the client enters his residence, yet that is precisely when it should
begin, and grow like skin on a human organism.” Hence, to the
stake with architects; their job and privileges should be turned
over to the consumers, to the people.

Mr. Sammler is much more skeptical about spontaneous creativ-
ity: ‘“Then: a crazy species? Yes, perhaps. Though madness is
also a masquerade, the project of a deeper reason... . . And what
to do? In the matter of histrionics, see, for instance, what that
furious world-boiler Marx had done, insisting that revolutions
were made in historical costume, the Cromwellians as Old Testa-
ment prophets, the French in 1789 dressed in Roman outfits. But
the proletariat, he said, he declared, he affirmed, would make
the first nonimitative revolution. It would not need the drug of
historical recollection. From sheer ignorance, knowing no models,
it would simply do the thing pure. He was as giddy as the rest
about originality. And only the working class was original. Thus
history would get away from mere poetry. Then the life of human-
kind would clear itself of copying. It would be free from Art.

AA

Oh, no. No, no, not so, thought Sammler. Instead, Art increased,
and a sort of chaos.” Stalin’s proletarian society copied the archi-
tecture of autocracy and despotism, and people who practiced
confrontation politics ‘““were obviously derivative. And of what—
of Paiutes, of Fidel Castro? No, of Hollywood extras. Acting
mythic. . . . Better, thought Sammler, to accept the inevitability
of imitation and then to imitate good things.. . . Greatness with-
out models? Inconceivable.. . . Make peace therefore with inter-
mediacy and representation. But choose higher representations.
Otherwise the individual must be the failure he now sees and
knows himself to be. Mr. Sammler, sorry for all, and sore at
heart” (Mr. Sammler’s Planet [New York: Viking, 1970], pp. 148-
49).

Mr. Sammler is right, an architectural code is needed. But the
liberating force of the modern language of architecture is oriented
toward Hundertwasser’s objectives. It teaches one to desanctify
the canons and precepts of the Enlightenment for the sake of
more concrete choices. The seven invariables all refer to specific
models, from William Morris’ Red House to the masterpieces
of Wright, Le Corbusier, Gropius, Mies, Aalto, and the more re-
cent achievements of Safdie and Johansen. They also refer to
the past, to Borromini, Michelangelo, Rossetti, Brunelleschi, to
the Middle Ages, late antiquity, Hadrian’s Villa, Greek acropo-
lises, and even to prehistory—to show that the modern language
of architecture is not merely the language of modern architecture;
it enfolds the heresies and dissonances of history, those countless
“exceptions to the rule” which have finally been emancipated
and which can provide the backbone of an alternative language.

Participation is the rallying cry of young people, politicians,
sociologists, and artists. There is a considerable element of dema-
gogy in that cry. What does taking part mean in architecture?
Giving the man in the street a T-square and compasses and telling
him to design anything he likes? He would only ape the most
backward classical models. It does ‘not mean offering him several
plans and asking him to take his pick. What criteria would he
follow? Interpreted this way, participation is nothing more than
a slogan. Instead, it is a substantial corollary of the seven invari-
ables of the modern code.

Every one of the invariables, from listing functions to reintegra-
tion, demands participation, for they are concerned with the form-
ative process (not with form), with the unfinished, with an archi-
tecture that can grow and change, an architecture that is not
isolated but can communicate with external reality and even soil
its hands with kitsch. Nobody wants “beautiful” consolatory ob-
jects any more. Art has stepped down from its pedestal to meet
life halfway and assimilate the esthetic valences of the ugly and
the cast-off. Alberto Burri paints rags; Claes Oldenburg discovers
the message in a “soft typewriter’; noise is not antimusic but
rather ‘‘alternative music”; and in architecture, the Mummers
Theater looks as if it had been built with junk bought from a
scrap dealer.

The unfinished in art has a long history, from Mnesicles to
Rossetti and Palladio, reaching its high point in Michelangelo.
Contemporary art, however, codifies the unfinished by the com-
pletion of an interrupted communicative process, requiring action
by the user. Thus participation is not a paternalistic sop but an
inherent feature of the coming-into-being of an open work of
art. Take city planning. Classicists envisage total city plans that
can be carried out only in dictatorial regimes. Modern architects,
instead, fight for open and continuous planning that can answer

| a Oe

6 TATRA TR

>
»
.

25. “Design for a city design”: Plug-in City, by the British Archigram group.
Dense urban concentration, forests of skyscrapers connected at various levels
and functionally reintegrated, extensive green areas all around. This sort of organi-
zation would also contribute to a more intense community life.

society's new demands at any moment. The classicists design
Renaissance “ideal cities’”’ that are abstract, utopian, and perpetu-
ally frustrating. The moderns know that they cannot design a
real city, they can only design its tentative design; that is to
say, they can develop a hypothetical program for the future, but
one that will be carried out with different and unexpected forms
as needs change.

The unfinished approach is the goal of the seven invariables,
and it is a fundamental prerequisite if architecture is to be involved
in the land- and townscape, assimilate its contradictions, and
rummage in squalor and kitsch in search of human values that
need saving. Sociologists have found that slums, didonvilles, favelas,
and barriadas have an intensely vital sense of community that is
unknown in “planned” lower-class housing developments. Why
is that? Because adventure, the pioneering spirit, and neighborli-
ness are missing in planned settlements, together with that spon-
taneous kitsch which, despite its negative features, can be ex-
tremely stimulating. In the modern language of the unfinished,
participation is the indispensable structural complement of archi-
tecture in action.

There it is. The seven invariables provide a guide to design.
No architect, certainly not Wright, Le Corbusier, Mies, or Aalto,
would subscribe to them in toto, although Johansen and Safdie
might. They are seven heresies, seven testimonies against classical
idolatry, intolerable if taken all at once. Small matter. With this
guide in the pocket, each will apply them as far as he can. Some
will not apply them at all. Herbert Marcuse (An Essay on Liberation,
1969) calls people like that “the mad ones, the uncommitted,
those who take flight into all kinds of mysticism, the fools and
the scoundrels, and those who couldn’t care less whatever
happens.”

Afterthougnts

} (COMING OF AGE

Throughout architectural history. linguistic codification has
marked a culture's coming of age What is it that conventionally
distinguishes history from prehistory? The discovery of writing,
that is, an institutionalized way of communicating. Of course,
even before writing there were instruments of transmission, but
at a restricted level, Likewise architects, for better or for worse,
have communicated ideas and experience even without a formal-
ized idiom at their disposal. But only now can one speak, read,
and write architecture Outside a restricted specialist milieu. This
achievement transcends the framework of the discipline and im-
plies democratic development, a new social era for architecture
based on a consensus that is not paternalistic, populist, or preten-
tious (Where real needs are Constantly mixed up with those created
by advertising), but authentic and direct

Many architects are afraid to grow up. They prefer to remain
dependent children under the authority of a father figure. But
in the 1950s and 1960s the fathers—Wright, Le Corbusier, Gro-
pius, Mies van der Rohe, Mendelsohn, and, a few years later,
Louis Kahn—died. Moreover, some of them stopped nourishing
their children lony before they actually died) Mies, for example,
when he began working with closed prisms and abandoned the
poetics oF fluid spaces channeled by De Stijl tree plans; and Gro-
plus, When he turned to teamwork in America and forgot the
system of breaking blocks up into functional volumes, which
had been the preat achievement of the Bauhaus. Even Le Corbu-
ster, When he took his giant step forward at Ronchamp, left teach-
ing behind and disinherited children and yrandchildren, who had

aR

to fall back on the Le Corbusier “manner” of the Lyons La Tour-
ette monastery and Chandigarh.

There are no more father figures. It is time to grow up, get
free of “adult’’ guardianship, and speak an independent codified
language that derives naturally from the work of the masters
but is not dominated by their individual styles and the weight
of their overwhelming personalities.

Is there any other alternative? None that does not carry infanti-
lism to grotesque extremes. Some orphan architects, without a
father to turn to, head back to the maternal womb of the academy,
the classicist ideology of power, geometric dogmas, harmony, and
proportion. In short, in their anxiety for security, they commit
suicide. Others fall into the opposite error. Rather than accept
the modern language, they push back ‘zero degree”’ to the limit
of chaos and anticulture and reject any system of communication.

The stages of development in music are clear: atonality, Expres-
sionist destructuring; then, dodecaphonic rationalism; and, finally,
postdodecaphonic aserial music, which eschews rationalist rigor,
but not in the name of despair and chaos. These stages are less
evident in architecture, because Expressionist zeroing (Gaudi and
later Mendelsohn) did not precede rationalism but evolved almost
contemporaneously with it from the beginning of the century
to the early twenties. Thus the postrationalist organic era is full
of Expressionist revivals, especially in the serpentine forms of
Aalto. Even the Ronchamp chapel is a mixture of Expressionism
and Art /nformel with occasional elements of ‘“‘Baroque persuasion”
in the lighting, sometimes seductive and sometimes overstated.
It is worth stressing the point that there are two refuges in the
maternal womb: academic classicism and pseudo-Baroque Expres-
sionism. The latter may seem more complex and hypnotic, but
it is no less naive and regressive than the former.

2. MANNERISM AND LANGUAGE

Is it really indispensable that there be a codified language? If
its invariables are derived from architectural masterpieces, is it
not enough to follow those precedents? In other words, why pass
through a code, which is necessarily reductive, instead of going
straight to the original sources?

Certainly, before the constants of the modern language of archi-
tecture were formulated, the only historically legitimate path was
Mannerism. At a theoretical level, there is nothing wrong with
that. On the contrary. Mannerism humanizes the styles of gen-
iuses by divesting them of the messianic attitude of a Wright
or the doctrinarianism of a Le Corbusier. If Mannerism could
make these styles truly popular and available to all, there would,
of course, be no need to codify an architectural language. Unfortu-
nately this is not the case. Mannerism neither popularizes nor
democratizes. It is a highly intellectual operation and almost un-
transmittable. Take, for example, Rosso Fiorentino and Pontormo,
the occasional followers of Michelangelo and Borromini, the disci-
ples of Wright, Le Corbusier, and Mendelsohn; they amount to
a few dozen in the whole world. Why is this the case? Because
Mannerists work from results, from finished products, and neglect
the process that developed the products. What they do might
be called “speech about speech.” Mannerists elaborate on forms,
not on structure and formation. They annotate and distort forms
in a sagacious but limited and aristocratic way. The works of
the masters are derived from the reality of life. The works of
the Mannerists are derived simply from those of the masters.
The masters continually destructure, they go back to the starting
point, and they return to listing functions directly. The Manner-
ists, on the other hand, perceive reality only through the filter
of selected and exalted images. Thus Mannerists tire quickly and
are sucked back into the academy, which is always lying in am-
bush (neo-sixteenth-centuryism, neoclassicism, contemporary
neohistorical trends).

It is important to bear in mind the genetic weakness of Manner-
ism: the only way it can destroy classical models—either tear
them apart in anger or undo them with irony—is by preserving
those models as emblems of a sanctity to be desanctified. To
challenge their authority the Mannerists must first acknowledge
it. The infractions and dissonant notes of the Mannerists presup-
pose the tyranny of classical harmony. Indeed Mannerism has
nothing to work on when it encounters anticlassical methodolo-
gies, as in the buildings of Michelangelo, Borromini, or Wright.
Without the despotic reign of the academy, the Mannerists have

nothing to struggle against, and their invective is hushed to a
murmur.

A direct unmediated passage from the writing of the masters
to the common language of the people does not and cannot exist.
It would be absurd to tell people to go back to the sources, to
read the Divine Comedy in order to learn Italian. If a language is
to be spoken by everybody, some invariables must be distilled
from the works of poets so that it becomes possible to communi-
cate in everyday prose.

3. THE HISTORIC SEQUENCE OF THE INVARIABLES

Can the sequence of the seven invariables be modified at will?
For example, can reintegration come before antiperspective three-
dimensionality, or space in time precede listing functions?

This sort of question ignores the historical genesis and gradual
development of language. The invariables are not axioms outside
of time, absolute truths, but stages marked by specific experiences.
William Morris destructured the classical code, took it back to
zero degree; and he championed listing, the inventorying of func-
tions, and freedom from canons of symmetry, proportion, orders,
axes, alignments, and relations of full and empty spaces. Disso-
nance marks a later stage. It is not sufficient merely to register
functional requirements; one becomes truly aware of them by
noting their contrasts. Clearly, then, the first two invariables can-
not be interchanged. Antiperspective three-dimensionality devel-
oped alongside Expressionism and especially with Cubism, when
the object was no longer observed from a privileged viewing point
but dynamically, from innumerable points of view. The result
was four-dimensional decomposition, the analytical syntax of the
De Stijl group. How could De Stijl precede Cubism, when it is
one of Cubism’s applications? Perhaps the fifth invariable, that
is, the involvement of every architectural element in the structural
play, could be moved, since it derives from all of modern engineer-
ing. But Wright, in the last of his eight sketches reproduced above,
correlates it with the poetics of projecting structures and with
the dismembering of the box into dissonant panels. As for infusing
space with time, this occupies the sixth place, and it could not
be otherwise. In effect, this invariable applies the volumetric tech-

niques of Cubism to the cavities, the vital hollow spaces, the
special places of architecture. Finally, it is superfluous to repeat
that one cannot reintegrate what has not been separated. Other-
wise it would be a question of a priori integration and a retreat
to classicism.

The sequence of the seven invariables has been established
by a historical process that lasted more than a century, and it
cannot be altered without serious consequences. Every architect
must follow the single stages of this itinerary, always referring
back to the preceding invariables, without omission, that is to
functional listing, the annihilation of every convention and set
phrase, and the radical destructuring of the traditional architec-
tural apparatus.

The modern language is a precise and almost ruthless instru-
ment of criticism, a kind of litmus paper that scientifically deter-
mines whether and to what degree an architect is modern. Take
Alvar Aalto, for example. His work incorporates listing, disso-
nance, antiperspective three-dimensionality, cantilevers, space in
time, and reintegration, six invariables magnificently applied.
What is missing, however, is four-dimensional decomposition,
so that the reintegration in Aalto’s works is uncertain, based as
it is on the revival of Expressionist and even Baroque themes.

It is not compulsory to apply all the invariables, but their se-
quence must be respected. Gropius’ work has listing, dissonance,
antiperspective three-dimensionality, and volumetric decomposi-
tion; it ignores space in time and reintegration. Mies’s European
works are a triumph of decomposition and the spatial dynamics
that derives from it. But in America he neglected first functional
listing and dissonance and then antiperspective three-dimension-
ality; hence he reverted to academicism. What about Le Corbusier?
He explored all the invariables, but not simultaneously. In his
rationalistic buildings, listing and reintegration are missing, al-
though the latter is splendidly present in the town plan for Algiers.
He rarely decomposed, and when he did it was in the inhibited
purist sense. At Ronchamp he inventoried and reintegrated, he
stressed antiperspective three-dimensionality and introduced time
into space. He broke things down, but he did not decompose
them.

The seven invariables can be found all together in some of
Wright's buildings and to a maximum degree in Falling Water,
the Divine Comedy of the modern language of architecture.

4, MISUNDERSTANDINGS OF THE ““LANGUE/PAROLE RELATIONSHIP

It often happens that semiotic research uses new instruments to
old ends and unconsciously fosters recrudescences of the academy.

One mistake is to exclude masterpieces and exceptional works,
the products of creative geniuses, when codifying a language,
and to take into consideration only “typical” or “paradigmatic”
buildings, which represent the average standard. This is to neglect
the fact that, lacking a code to make it generally accessible, the
modern language has been unable to influence much of contempo-
rary construction, which communicates only questionable and
not very meaningful thoughts. Excluding masterpieces castrates
the modern language. What remains is mediocrity, and that is
always academic. The opposite procedure should be followed.
Rules should be derived from exceptions, this is the only way
the new language can become flesh.

The Italian language, for instance, was formalized on the basis
of the most important texts, from the Divine Comedy on. Once
structured, the language was assimilated at all levels, even that
of everyday speech. The same thing can happen in architecture.
The invariables derived from masterpieces can be applied correctly
by even the humblest builders. But it is vain to seek for the
invariables in “typical’’ or “paradigmatic’’ works, which are such
precisely because they do not incorporate the invariables.

People spoke Italian long before a codification was derived from
the Divine Comedy. The same sort of thing is true in architecture.
There are peasant houses, small factories, and vernacular struc-
tures, “architecture without architects” in short, which have spon-
taneously applied the seven invariables. The language of the Divine
Comedy arose from the vernacular. That poem legitimized an im-
pulse from below and, once codified, resulted in the Italian lan-
guage. Likewise Falling Water, the product of protracted travail
against academic scaffoldings, provides the basis for a popular
architectural language.

Some semiologists insist that architecture is made of rules and

exceptions, but that only the rules can be codified. What rules?
Since modern architecture is composed exclusively of exceptions,
the only rules there can be are those of the academy. If we codify
those rules, we run the risk of regressing to the Beaux-Arts pre-
conception of harmony as the rule and dissonance as the excep-
tion. This is the opposite of what modern music showed to be
the case when it established dissonance as the rule. Theodor
Adorno makes this clear: “The most advanced technical proce-
dures in music set problems that expose the resources of tradi-
tional [read: classical] harmony as a set of useless clichés. There
are modern compositions in which occasional tonic harmonies
appear, but it is this harmony, and not dissonance, which is ca-
cophonous .. .”” (Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno,
Dialektik der Aufkidrung, 1947). In architectural terms: academic
rules, not the modern invariables, are arbitrary and incongruous.
Adorno goes on to say that “the predomination of dissonance
seems to destroy the rational ‘logical’ relationships in tonality
[read: symmetry, proportion, geometric schemes, equilibrium of
full and empty, balance of masses, axiality, perspective alignment,
and so forth], that is, the simple relations of perfect harmony.
In this, however, dissonance is more rational than harmony, for
it offers to view, in an articulate although complex manner, the
relationship of the sounds that go into it, instead of creating a
unified ‘homogeneous’ mix that suppresses the individual compo-
nents... .”” Applying this principle to architecture, conventional
set phrases without semantic value are always harmonic, tonal,
and classicist, while meaningful messages are dissonant and ex-
press the reality of things and behaviors. It would be a serious
mistake to think, as Mannerists do, that dissonance is possible
only in contrast to harmony, which reduces dissonance to a mere
exception to the rule of tonality. This is not the case. To quote
Adorno again, “the new harmonies are not innocent successors
to the old consonance; rather, they are distinct in that their unity
is totally self-articulated. The single sounds unite to form a har-
mony, but within that harmony they can be distinguished one
from another as single sounds. In this way they continue to be
‘dissonant,’—not in respect of some sort of unachieved harmony
but in themselves.”

—

How many years, how many decades will it take to convince
architects of what music has long since mastered? Freedom fright-
ens them, and they demand harmonic consistency at all costs.
Since life is packed with dissonance, they prefer to take it in at
second hand by way of an a priori order. They practice self-
censorship and impoverish the language of architecture. They
really ought to hang the following quotation from Adorno on
their studio walls: “The cult of consistency leads to idolatry. Ma-
terial is no longer shaped and articulated to serve an artistic pur-
pose. Instead the preordained arrangement becomes the artistic
purpose. The palette takes the place of the picture.” In architec-
ture, the palette is all the fetishistic equipment of symmetry,
proportion, perspective, and power-inspired monumentality.

Other semiologists say, we are interested not in the differences
between classical and anticlassical idioms but in their similarities,
the elements they have in common. This thesis only seems plausi-
ble, because classicism is not a language, but rather a linguistic
ideology with no real basis, not even in the architectural works
of the Greco-Roman world or the Renaissance. This is the crux
of the matter: to deny the existence of a gap between architectural
theories and real buildings, between abstract Beaux-Arts interpre-
tations and the concrete languages of Greek, Roman, and Renais-
sance architecture is tantamount to enlisting semiotics in the cause
of reaction. There is no point in searching for a meeting ground
between the classical and the anticlassical, for all valid architects,
ancient and modern alike, have been anticlassical. Since classicism
is an artificial power-inspired construct, it is perhaps comparable
to the formal Latin that was exhumed in the fifteenth century
for the use of an elite that wanted to avoid the problems of a
living language. Would it not be absurd to look for what fifteenth-
century Italian and courtly Latin have in common?

Ferdinand de Saussure’s dichotomy of /angue and parole has gen-
erated innumerable misunderstandings in architectural theories,
for two reasons: first, /angue has been interpreted not as the con-
crete language of buildings but as the contrary, formal Beaux-
Arts ideology; second, as a consequence, the paroles, i.e., the cre-
ative acts, have been interpreted as exceptions and anomalies,
not to be assimilated by the /angue but to be excluded from it.

In verbal language, paroles start out as exceptions and then filter
into the normal /anyue. In architecture, instead, they always remain
exceptions, because the J/arnyue of classicism is not a real language,
but an abstract ideology refractory to anything new. What paroles
of Michelangelo or Borromini have ever found their way into
the classical language? Not one, as might be expected from a
pseudo-language that is frozen by its very nature. The same thing
can be said of Wright, Le Corbusier, Gropius, Mies, Mendelsohn,
and Aalto, whose ‘‘words” left the Beaux-Arts system untouched.

The difficulties that arise in discussions with Saussure’s follow-
ers derive from their assumption that the true language of archi-
tecture is classical. We know that it is anticlassical and always
has been. For us, then, the language of architecture is composed
exclusively of parv/es and is dissonant, while for them, paroles cannot
exist without a /anyxe, and hence the architectural paroles must
be referred to the non-/angue of classicism, with disastrous results.

5. THE SEVEN INVARIABLES IN TOWN PLANNING

Town planning is so closely related to architecture that one can
legitimately speak of “urbatecture.’” The seven invariables are
equally applicable to buildings, cities, and whole regions. Is not
inventorying functions the first thing to do in preparing a city
plan? Is not dissonance indispensable to keep zoning from being
monotonous? Likewise, antiperspective three-dimensionality pro-
vides the means to counter the mania for monumental axes, chess-
board street systems, and predetermined yeometrical spaces, be
they square, rectangular, round, or hexagonal. Breaking up the
building box is like breaking up the closed plan of the classical
city. And space in time? This is just as applicable on the urban
scale as it is on the architectural level. And reintegration seems
ever more urgent and fruitful in city planning if life is to be
infused into organisms that have been zoned to death.
Urbatecture. To reintegrate the city means to reweave its very
fabric and yive new drive to the various functions of its coeffi-
cients. It has been remarked more than once that schools are
low-use structures if the city segregates them in separate areas.
A school is unused for several hours of the day, all night, on
holidays, and during long vacations. This sort of waste is typical

of almost all public buildings (theaters, movie houses, government
offices, churches, and so forth) and can be eliminated only by
reintegrating educational, social, administrative, productive, com-
mercial, and recreational functions in a new organization that is
different from the present city. In town planning as in architecture,
the modern language abhors economic and cultural waste.

One beneficial result of the anticlassical code should be the
overcoming of a frustration that has plagued city planning at
least since the middle of the fifteenth century, when “ideal cities”
were conceived according to geometric patterns, with their grill
or radial schemata. These oppressive, despotic, and totalitarian
layouts are fostered by authority to contain social life within
an ironclad implacable “‘order.” Fortunately these ideal cities were
never built, despite some negligible attempts. But for centuries
the “ideal city’ has been doing serious damage to town planners’
psyches. Their megalomaniacally rigid programs have never made
headway, and planners have developed neurotic persecution com-
plexes. They feel unappreciated because urban development re-
mains oblivious to their work. Politicians, administrators, busi-
nessmen, rich and poor alike display the greatest indifference
to their plans. With a few exceptions, city planners have never
understood the reason for their lack of success. With no sensitivity
to social dynamics, but endowed with a driving mania for gran-
deur, they have always tried to regiment society in static, inhu-
man, and suffocating constructs. The proof is that ‘ideal cities”
have been built chiefly for four emblematic functions: military
bases, insane asylums, prisons, and cemeteries. Rectangular, circu-
lar, hexagonal, and radial plans have found full expression in
military installations from the Roman camp on, and in jails. They
are fine for places where men are rigidly disciplined or imprisoned,
from the Regina Coeli jail in Rome to Leavenworth. This sort
of city is “ideal” only for the powers that be. Even in the field
of military architecture, however, there have been rebellious spir-
its who rejected the code of geometry. Suffice it to mention Fran-
cesco di Giorgio, Sanmicheli, and Michelangelo’s 1529 plans for
the Florence fortifications.

What is particularly symptomatic is the fact that the great here-
tics of architectural history—Brunelleschi, Michelangelo, Palladio,


and Borromini—never drew up a city plan. They put their stamp
on whole cities, true, but without a priori constraints. Theirs was
a ferocious and passionate dialogue with the urban organism.
These men took it apart and possessed it, they calculated its devel-
opment by focal points and nodes of activity, careful never to
block its flexibility. It is no paradox to say that the only people
not needed in city planning are city planners. Is it conceivable
that a city planner rather than an urbatect like Biagio Rossetti
could ever have built the Ferrara of the Estes?

Does the modern language of architecture repudiate city plan-
ning? Certainly not. It repudiates classical planning, which is not
based on inventorying functions, dissonance, antiperspective vi-
sion, dismembering of the box, space in time, and organic coordi-
nation. How, then, can we draw up plans and direct the develop-
ment of cities and regions? We may follow the lead of
contemporary painting, which rejects the “‘finished’”’ object and
requires that the observer mentally complete the picture himself.
Like architecture and even more than architecture, city planning
must arise from an interplay of open hypotheses that can be
accepted, modified, or reoriented by society according to its own
complex and varied needs. It is a question of taking part in city
life from within—not passively but energetically day by day and
without the rigid authoritarian a priori principles of geometric
“order.”

6. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT ARCHITECTURAL WRITING

Is there not a risk that the codification of the modern language of architecture
will lead to a new academicism’ EVill not the seven invartables tend to become
precepts like those of the Beaux-Arts school, albett in the opposite direction?

This question is typical of many architects’ mentality. Imagi-
nary specters are invented to avoid the responsibility of trying
out something new. Why not try, instead, to design a building
or teach a course in design based on these invariables? The doubts
will vanish the minute you start listing functions.

Language concerns forms of communication, but is not the present problem
rather concerned with the content of those forms? And, in the last analysis,
does not the architects rele in society depend on that verw content?

The first invariable, inventorying, is specifically concerned with
functional content, building programs, and social behavior. If this
invariable is neglected, the whole construct falls apart or, rather,
makes no sense because there is nothing to express in dissonance,
nothing to decompose and reintegrate. This proves that the mod-
ern language will not tolerate alibis or excuses. If the question
of content is evaded, there can be only regression to classicism.

A sustem oreriteism based on the incariadles miu provide criteria tor judging
a fnisned building, bub iehat about atidesign. wond especially a citw plan?

The invariables provide a precision instrument for checking
every stage of design, from the preliminary sketch to the final
working drawings. This has been verified a hundred times at
the drawing board and in the classroom. Of course in a rough
plan you cannot, for example, estimate the exact degree of disso-
nance or four-dimensional decomposition. But the critical method
is still appropriate; one asks, can the design at this stage still
accommodate the principle of dissonance and decomposition? If
the answer is no, then the design is closed, reactionary, and classi-
cist and should be repudiated. In the first stages, functional listing
alone may be enough. But one must make sure that the design
is sufficiently open to accommodate the other invariables.

The act of designing Is nel aired Oub in stages arpliiig one invariable
diterandiner Ulsuadily aroiitects icra in sboithenc istion conceiving the wiele

They must be used to make sure that the synthesis, which is
pertectly legitimate in itself, is not rigid. Qne does not have to
start with analysis before proceeding to synthesis, but if the syn-
thesis cannot pass the functional and semantic test, it means that
it has fallen into classicism.
degree in corsimg tedily expt? Denes creative sprints mace revolutions ty
aA iid is POSntice trom ine mast and the present and mmeorporahny uv

' - : .
spre Apes wipe pe 38 bf tree 1,
DSO Sagi pron Of fee ferther,

Suffice it to consider the relationship between Latin and Italian.
The vulgar tongue brought Latin to zero degree in the sense that
it destructured its code. True. it retained several elements, but
it took them out of the context of the old language and gave

them a different context. In the same way, modern architecture

takes what is good from the past and reveals its anticlassical
essence. It rejects and annihilates not the past but the corruption
of it that was carried out by Beaux-Arts norms.

But why condemn symmetry, which is so common in anerent archite dare
and even raises its head in several works by Wright?

Cesare Beccaria, writing about crime and punishment (Der éesits:
e delle pene, 1764), was interested in prisons, not in free democratic
communities. Yet he said, “It is a false sense of utility that would
try to give a multitude of people that symmetry and order which
only inanimate material can absorb.” That epigraph ought to be
carved on the drawing boards of architects and city planners. It
a building is conceived as an inanimate monumental object, only
to be looked at and not to be used, then symmetry is fine, because
it is a perfect reflection of political and bureaucratic authoritarian-
ism. But if a building must perform specific Functions and accom-
modate particular contents, it cannot be symmetrical, because
symmetry, like harmony in music, binds every element to what
has gone before and what comes after and to what is above and
below, Symmetry sacrifices the particular and individual on the
altar of overall design, which is uniform, hierarchical, and unalter-
able. As for Wright, it must be said that you cannot invent a
new language in a single day. He had to fight the reigning, classi-
cism (architectural ‘‘Latin’), and there is nothing scandalous in
the fact that he sometimes used partially symmetrical schemes.
But what is more important in Wright, the rare leftovers of tradi-
tion or his revolutionary messages? The academic eye concentrates
on whatever is obsolete in a genius, from Brunelleschi to Palladio.
What we should look at are their original achievements. Why
is there such fear of dissonance and asymmetry? The linguist
Giacomo Devoto wrote in / dinguayyto dltaha “UW is strange that
qualified scholars are 50 reluctant to accept the fertile principle
of the contraposition of the marginal and the central, which has
marked the great transition from one-dimensional to two dimen.
sional linguistics, in preparation for the three dimensional disci
pline of mudern socivlogical linguistics.” Symmetry flattens and
diminishes, while aur lexical needs are imimnenne As early as the
first century 6, Jucretius again and ayain deplored the sermon
patrii egestas, the poverty of the national idiam, And Devoto contin:

ues: “Plato’s hypothesis of language as nomos, as ‘law’ or ‘conven-
tion,’ led to the concept of ‘analogy.’ What Plato called language’s
‘creativity’ or evergei led to the doctrine of ‘anomaly.’. . .”” Devo-
to’s incisive verdict on the Italian language could also be applied
to architecture: ‘A selective, classicist, subjective exigency, and
hence an impoverishing one, won out over the functional exigency
which enriches the idiom. This is a feature of the Italian language
that has been felt throughout its history down to our own times.”
The fear of change leads to the geometric and to symmetry.

Nowadavs no one is interested in problems of architectural language or in
architecture generally. The challenge comes trom outside the fleld and concerns
the struggle far a new kind of citv and a diferent environment. Why bother
ahoul the seven invartables?

To make the battle more successful and spirited. This came
out clearly in regard to a housing project built in Rome in the
Pietralata area. A group of leftist students set up a “protest dis-
play” about the conditions in that area. There were posters with
photographs documenting the lack of service facilities, the dem-
onstrations that had been staged by the residents, police action,
and so on. They made a lot of noise, but there was very little
in the way of concrete achievement in this protest. At a certain
point, however, the students decided to make an analysis of the
neighborhood in terms of the seven invariables. They produced
more posters showing that none of the invariables had been ap-
plied in the design of the area. The display was no longer dema-
gogic, and it was infinitely more persuasive.

Finallu. tohy ts it that the modern linguaye of architecture has not been
codited before? What caused this inexplicable delav, when the new language
could have been used extenstociu in the profession and in the schools during
these past decades ct feverish balding?

No answer to this anguished and almost obsessive question
can provide anything more than mere consolation. One may cite
a Variety of reasons: (1) as long as the masters of the modern
movement were still alive and active, the illusion persisted that
some “manner” connected with their styles could take the place
of a codified language; (2) structuralism, semiotics, and linguistics
were not sufficiently developed to shake the world of architecture;
(3) it took a total reduction to zero degree, not just in architecture

but existentially as well, as in the Paris spring of 1968, to stimulate
the codification of a democratic idiom. All these explanations
are plausible, and others as well, but they are tautological. The
question remains. Schoenberg created and codified the language
of modern music. Wright, Le Corbusier, Gropius, and Mendelsohn
created the language of modern architecture, but they did not
codify it. Why? Why didn’t someone else do it, then, and spare
architecture decades of waste and destruction, false ideologies,
and desperate flights into the past and future? In any case, the
time has come to spread the democratic language of architecture.

29. The ““Modulor” by Le Corbusier, a metric scale based upon golden sections
and human measures (cartoon by Jan van Goethem). Corbu’s purism simplifies
the process of Cubism in a classical key. Conscious of this danger, Le Corbusier
denied the purist trend from the Chapelle de Ronchamp on.

Part Two: Architecture versus Architectural History

Precediny pages

30-31. A meeting ground of two architectural geniuses: Borromini’s spiral atop
Sant’Tvo alla Sapienza, Rome (1642-00), and Wright’s helicoidal Guggenheim Mu-
seum, New York (1946-59).

Above

32-37. Historiography passively registered in nineteenth-century revivals: neo-
Greek (British Museum, London), neo-Raman (Panthéon, Paris), neo-Medievalism
(Prison, Wurzburg), neo-Gothic (Trinity Church, New York), neo-Renaissance
(Haughwout Building, New York), and neo-Baroque (Opera, Paris).

Introduction: Antclassicism and Le Corbusier

In Part One I showed that the present-day architectural code
concerns not only the masters of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries but all architects who, over the span of history, fought
against dogma, hallowed and entrenched precepts, a priori ideolo-
gies and theories of style, formal taboos, and the canons of
classicism.

The modern language emerged and matured out of a simultane-
ously creative and critical commitment which, on the one hand,
stands for the right to speak architecture in a way that differs
from the classical and, on the other, explores history in the search
for new roots in the past. We “write” architecture in a different
language because we “read” it in a heterodox frame of mind.
The impulse to write coincides with that of rereading the ancient
texts and thus avoiding false interpretations. Architects have
thrown off the strictures of classicism. Similarly, historians spurn
academic methods of examining and judging monuments. In fact,
the critic, from Baudelaire to van Doesburg, is oftentimes one
with the artist.

How has the time-space language, from nineteenth-century
eclecticism to the present day, become structured? This is the
theme of the present study, which will trace the dialogue between
architecture and historiography, and record the points of contact
between linguistic invention and critical research. The breach be-
tween the old and the new architecture can be likened to the
distance between, say, Latin and Italian or French, one an extinct
tongue, the others living—with the difference, however, that clas-
sicism is not a real language but rather an ideology aiming to

91

codify any “style” by laying down abstract formulas and arbitrary
regulations,

To begin with, we must repudiate two persistent misunder-
standings. One is the romantic myth of the ascetic poet who
stands aloof from all dialectic involvements with cultural and
linguistic events. It is easy to prove that every authentic architect
nurtures his inspiration by delving into the past. His elective
attinities, however partial they may be, are more significant, yen-
erally, than those of the critics because he must face emergencies
of the moment and resolve them) The second fallacy is that one
can prasp modern architecture without a deep knowledge of its
precedents. A brief survey of the cross purposes that marked
the most important linguistic ruptures, from the present back
to prehistory, will disprove this misapprehension once and for
all

Asa point of departure, let us consider the most famous expo-
nents of the modern movement, Frank Lloyd Wright and Le Cor-
busier. Both were endowed with strongly individualistic visions
of architecture, yet they culled their ideas from definite historical
contexts. Wright was a devotee of Henri Louis Sullivan, (Lieber
Mester who, in turn, was dependent on the neo-Romanesque
of Henry Hobson Richardson and, by opposition, on American
eclecticism Le Corbusier harked back to the origin of European
rationalism, to the puritanism of Adolf Loos, enemy of the Vienna
Secession, the Austrian counterpart of the Art Nouveau: move-
ment created by the Brussels architect Victor Horta in 1893 and
spearheaded by Henry van de Velde, passionate apostle of the
Enylish Arts and Crafts school With the Red House, built for
William Morris tn 1859, came the birth of modern architecture.
But we can understand Morris’ retorm only if we put it within

38 4b A retrospective view of the modern arctutectunal movement. from the tor
Wryht’s balling, Water Bear Run Pennsylvania (1986 29) and Le Corbusier's
Maison Da Roche, Auteml near Pars (1923), Guaranty Building in Buffalo, by
Dankinar Adler and Loum Ho Sullivan (1894) and Adolf foos’s house in the Not
hartyasse, Vienna (19b3} Ames Gate Lodge an North Baston, Massachusetts, by
Henry HE Richardson (2880) and rating of Victor Horta’. studio, St Gilles, Brussels
(1898) Arace Red House, designed by Plitp Webb for Witham Morris, Bexley
Heath Kent (1859), which marked the birth of the modern movement


ae aeee eS beeen

the context of the neo Gothic culture anticipated as far back as
1747 1 Elorace Walpole’s Country mansion at Strawberry Hill,
near bondon Phere evaluation of the Middle Ayes Was a Weapon
wielded to combat neoclasstasm, the ongin of which can be traced
back to the antbiyueus position toward the Baroque of a Juvarra
ona Vanvitelly Now we can proceed faster Mannerism, particu-
lanly Michelanyelo’s abrupt departures from the classical, linked
the Baroque wath the sixteenth century The fifteenth-century
reversion to the sixteenth was heralded by Bramante’s arrival
tn Rome Between the early Renaissance and the Gothic stands
the cupola of the Duomo of Florence, work of Arnolfo di Cambio
and Bronelleschi, as welbas the humanistic examples in medieval
language, suchas San Miniato al Monte in Florence and the por-
heooot the Civita Castellana cathedral The continuity from Gothic
back to Romanesque is well known hus, we arrive at Sant’Am-
broygo tn Mitin, St. Martin in Tours, and the abbey in Cluny,
Destin around aw 960 The Romanesque world reverts to the
High Middle Ayes, to the church of San Pietro in Tuscania, to
the Caesuras which measure the nave of Santa Maria in Cosmedin
in Rome, thence to the Byzantine cycle and the paleo-Christian
tradition, which takes us to the first century a.p., to the Roman
basilica of Porta: Mayyiore and the catacombs. The concept of
“Tate ancient refers to the close attinities between Christianity
and Roman art, which sprang: from a dual source: first, the Etrus-
cancawilization, the THtalic period, and Kuropean prehistory; and
seoond, Hellenism: and archaic Greece, which carried forward the
Cretan culture and theretore the culture of the Near East, whose
Ontns tran back, once more, inte protohistory.

Poco N backward phince from: nineteenth century eclectrism te prehistory from
he for Hotace Walpole s neo Gotha country house at Strawberry Hill (1747)
and Reyguse at Caserta by Tuags Vanvitedls (6752074), Machelaungelo’s Palazzo dei
Consenvaton, Rome ¢iodey and BHramante’s Tempietto di San Pietro in Montorio,
Reme (bo00) cupola of the Duomo in Horence, by Fihppo Brunelleschi (1420)
and church of San Petro in Tuscania (enghth century), Catacombs of Domitilla,
Rome (third century) and Roman aqueduct at Gard (Pont du Gard) near Nimes
(ap Td) the Parthenon at Athens (447 432 sc Jand the palace at Phaestos (2000
He) trade ow hanes between Crete and the ancient Onent, and dolmen at Carnac,
Hritunny (about E500 we)

ten MESOPHr,....

Toostasp the matrix ot the language protessed by Wright and
Be Corbusier: we must se back te the teurth oullennium pe
and then travel ain the aeens preceding the discovery of writing
What do owe exclide® The Far Fast: Chinese Indian) Japanese,
and Russian architecture Attean and pre Columbian monuments
of the Americas Even this is ingecurate not only because the
Meaicao prranuds of Cheolula and Teotrhuacan document the
e\chanves between the eastern Mediterranean and Central Amer:
reat bat mamly because Qnuental and probistone intluences sup-
pled ao parameter te moder art Reteremees te Miawan culture
and direct borrowings from the lapanese crep up frequently in
Worinhts work

The analenies between the Middle Ages and the Arts and Cratts
mevement Gothire and Art Nouveau Renaissance and modern
rationalisar Baroque and organo arebutecture -as well as the
seven invaniables ef the contemporain linguage deriving trem
them are the subrect matter et the tour chapters that follow
with a concludima: section on pretistery Thais leaves aside ancient
Greece and Rome a fonial omission imasmuch as the new archi:
tecture has turned its back on the Chissiaisim formalized by the
Beaun Atts academy But are the Hellen and Reman arts truly
invetriev able Det us examine this question

The Greek patameny was fist omaniced into a historical sv stem
wy toss by lohann Joachion Wine kelmann un his c- vrata! woe
and Subsequentl by dames Stuart and Nicholas Revett in then .

Poe Eee (old by the aginevements of the Dilettann GaN iy) mT
Society (i Tee) and tv bord Bian s sensational exploit in removing , a Sc..  Qeee 777
the Parthenon marbles te Londen Eset A mounting fervor

Hellenism was further: stumulated by the Gueek war otf inde:

rh elle Oe oe mm CRE

MA 48h. ce oa. ae eo

sents otoextor baropean cohoes wtih Toe ntluen cad the devel . wig?

madera tate obs Sur Pvsasdoat Deotibssnacain Nexo cea eae
veh cee ev dence ot ew. harees between buster Mtadennanean eulfure and
re} Nemera  Ge Detrave or Qoetra. at at Teotihuawan Mews
Met erton yy oowath adeseoitass that aspect seme of bumk biowd Wrehes

pasty experiments soo. Phoena hlalan the lemypie or By Ado un near Rvoto
watog bak fe the Plenin pesaat (read Besdies Weeh: ae cient lapanese an tite,
’

tue onfinenaad cistercius bus opean aig bites ts ric hating Bane Tat


pendence in 1821. The great archaeological digs of 1750-80 and
the studies they sparked fomented the Greek Revival in Great
Britain: the Bank of England (1795-1827), designed by John Soane,
reinterprets the Corinthian order of the Temple of the Sybil at
Tivoli; St. Pancras church (1819-22), by William Inwood, imitates
the Erechtheum; while Robert Smirke consecrated the neo-Greek
style in the British Museum (1823) in London. In Germany, Karl
Gotthard Langhans conceived the Brandenburg Gate (1789) in
Berlin in terms of the Propylaea of the Acropolis in Athens, and
Leo von Klenze set about hellenizing the city of Munich from
1816, while Karl Schinkel, although a sometime devotee of the
Gothic, adopted classic elements in the theater and in the “Neue
Wache” in Berlin, as well as in the church of St. Nikolaus (1843-
49) in Potsdam. The contagious fever for Greek models spread
across the Atlantic and, from 1820 to 1860, infected the United
States, where Benjamin Latrobe and William Strickland were the
most ardent champions of the revival.

All this, however, is extraneous to our theme, since it makes
no contribution to the development of the modern architectural
language, in fact only hinders it. Such classicist structures as,
for example, the Church of the Madeleine in Paris and St. George’s
Hall in Liverpool attest to the unconditional surrender of art to
erudition: glacial, emphatic magnifications of museum plaster,
which in northern Europe, however, virtually evaporated in the

ward
2

to erg
fog, and consequently had no real dependence on archaeological ae PW ee ep
Heretical, on the other hand, in the anti- Beaux-Arts sense, was Ear ah Oe ., a ee

Le Corbusier’s love for Greece. During a pilgrimage he made to

00-63. Le Corbusier's sketches of the Athenian Acropolis, published in Vers une
Architecture (1923). From the lop: the Parthenon seen from the Propylaea; a glimpse
of the Propylaea from the stylobate of the Parthenon; the Acropolis, showing
the “pure” volume of the Parthenon; the Temple of Athena.

Following pages:

64-69. Left) the Acropolis in Athens seen from the air; the crude rock at the
foot of the Parthenon; the square lacunars of the Parthenon. Right: Le Corbusier's
“pure” volume of the Villa Savoye at Poissy (1929); skyscrapers in Le Corbusier’s
cityscape of Antwerp (1933); a museum quad with unlimited expansion, designed
by Le Corbusier (1939).


that country in his youth, he discovered architectural values com-
pletely obliterated by the revivalists. He indicated the anticlassic
features of the Hellenic language as follows:

—the taste for isolated volumes, autonomous prisms in the
light, freely situated over an irregular landscape and cast in ele-
mentary geometrical schemes, as exemplified by the squares of
Phidias’ lacunary ceiling—a prophecy of modern Purism;

—the urban grids of Priene, Miletus, and, in general, all the
cities laid out according to Hippodamus’ principles—grids similar
to those of the contemporary metropolis;

—molding. On the suspended prism of Corbu’s Villa Savoye
at Poissy, we see sensuous, chromatic, curved planes as the culmi-
nating element of the ‘‘promenade architecturale.” These ‘odyets
a réaction poetique, infusing the rigid, rational stereometries with
lyrical qualities, are the offshoots of the entases and echini, the
fluting, and the thousand imperceptible inflections of a vibrant
Greek arithmetic—plastic adjectives which become disruptive
substantives in the Ronchamp block.

The knottiest problem confronting the modern architectural
language was that of surmounting the Renaissance perspective
vision. To solve it, Le Corbusier reverted to a classical language
that predated perspective. He produced authentic testimonies
from ancient Greece which clamorously confuted Beaux-Arts aca-
demic doctrines.

The influence of the Roman heritage on modern architecture
is both hybrid and complex. It takes on the individual stamp
of its mediators, from Palladio to neoclassic erudition. Not infre-
quently neo-Roman merged with neo-Greek. Robert Wood’s
tomes on Palmyra and Baalbek (1753-57) and the description
of the palace of Diocletian in Split in Architectural Antiquities of

70-71 Le Corbusier and the Greek town grid Adore plan of Priene, according
to Patrice Bonnet The Acropolis (end of the fourth century 8.c.) is located near
the top, close to the mountains Belew: plan of Chandigarh, capital of Punjab,
India, layout by Le Corbusier. The Capitol with the main public buildings is
located in the upper sector, close to the mountains

Following pages

72-73. Model of Chandigarh, with the grid system and the Capitol at the north.
Insert, Model of Priene, with the grid system and the Acropolis at the north.


Bp

‘
- _—_ om

4m:

=. ~ { .

eer ne - vet

i

74-77 Separation of volumes from the ground, and plastic moldings in Greek
culture and in Le Corbusier’s work. Let. stylobate of the Temple of Afaia at
Egina (fifth century ac.) and a capital of one of the columns of the Propylaea
at Athens (437-33 pc.). Ait? pilotis of Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye in Poissy
(cf. 07) and interior of a house at Parte Molitor, Paris (1933).

Faviowiny putyes

78-80 Fluting and entasis of the Parthenon columns. Molded walls of Le Corbusi-
ers Chapelle de Ronchamp (1950-53) The “objects with poetic reaction,” discov-
ered during the research carried out into Greek moldings, involve the structural
organism (cf 183)

Rome (1821), by George Ledwell Taylor and Edward Cresy, stimu-
lated elegant, flexible evocations, particularly in the United States
where Thomas Jefferson created the uncommon beauties of Mon-
ticello (1790-1820) and recreated the Pantheon in the library of
the University of Virginia without excessive philological com-
punction. Cold and pedantic, on the other hand, are numerous
European buildings identified with the Roman revival. To cite a
few: in Great Britain, St. George’s Hall (1839), Liverpool, by Har-
vey Elmes and C. R. Cockerell, imitating the tepidarium of the
Baths of Caracalla; in Paris, Germain Soufflot’s Panthéon (1757-
90) and Barthélemy Vignon’s Madeleine (1806-42); in Italy, the
works of Luigi Canina, Luigi Cagnola, and Pasquale Poccianti.
The syncretic and adaptable nature of the ancient Roman con-
structions made imitations especially feasible where vast internal
spaces were needed, such as bank interiors or the great hall of
Pennsylvania Station (1906) in New York. But the Roman heritage
leads to monumentalism, as witness even the stylized neo-Roman
of Tony Garnier’s stadium in Lyons and Paul Bonatz’s railroad
station in Stuttgart, not to mention the monstrous corruptions
perpetrated in Italy by Marcello Piacentini, the Fascist architect.

No artist can be found who defied arrogant academic exegesis
to point out the orignal qualities of Roman architecture in modern
terms. Instead, this challenge was met in 1895 by the historian
Franz Wickhoft in his book Dre Wiener Genesis and, in 1901, by
Alois Riegl in Spatromische Kunstindustrie. Both authors identified
Rome's special contribution in the ‘‘method of continuing narra-
tion,” in the filmlike procession of figures spiraling on the Trajan
and Antonine columns; in the stage sets wholly built for the
amphitheaters which, unlike the Greek theaters, were never situa-
ted in positions where they could use the landscape as backdrops;

81. Cross vaults in Hadrian’s Villa, Tivoli (4.0 118-38). Ancient Roman architec-
ture prompted one of the nineteenth-century revivals, exemplified by the Pan-
theon in Paris, by Germain Soufflot (cf. 33). Only very few artists could be inspired
by ancient Rome without regressing into monumentalism, and this is why the
“Romanist” trend was firmly rejected by modern architects However, the “moder-
nity” of the Roman language, particularly in the orchestration of interior spaces
and in the “mode of continuing narration,” was revealed by the Viennese historian
Franz Wickhoff at the end of the last century.


and in the immense spaces of the basilicas and baths, with their
soaring cupolas and vaults. Even when they conquered Greece,
the Roman invaders crowded the acropolises, notably that of
Olympia, with new gymnasiums, galleries, porticos, temples, and
enclosing walls, blocking out the panoramic views. The “‘contin-
uum,” inherent in the very techniques of the conglomerate, saw
its triumph during the reign of Hadrian and in the late Roman
period, at Baalbek, at Split, and in the so-called Temple of Mi-
nerva Medica in Rome. It is not surprising that we find analogies
between Hadrian’s Villa at Tivoli and the Florida Southern College
(1938) by Frank Lloyd Wright, or that an architect like Louis
Kahn would take broad hints from Roman ruins to shape his
ideas.

The development of modern architecture, therefore, progresses
hand in hand with a cultural excavation, speaking figuratively,
which drastically altered the methods adopted by traditional his-
toriography and the results it had achieved. There is no gap be-
tween the way we write or speak architecture and the way we
read it. If the misunderstanding that the contemporary code has
broken away from the past persists and instigates reactionary
attitudes grounded in pseudoenvironmental theories, this is only
because too many among us are unable to cast off time-honored
prejudices recognizing the modern, operational values of the an-
cient monuments and their pertinence to present-day problems.
The purpose of this book is to show that the vitality of today’s
architectural language is one with the task of interpreting history
in a modern, almost futuristic version, so as to make it act effec-
tively as an incentive to creativity. The passive imitation that

82-84. Space in ancient Rome and its reflections in contemporary architecture.
Above: Theater of Dionysus, Athens, a natural cavea with the city and surrounding
landscape as its backdrop (330 8.c.). Center: Flavian Amphitheater (Colosseum),
Rome, where all the visible scenery is man-built (a.p. 75-80). Below: Louis Kahn's
project for the new Philadelphia (1956).

Following pages:

85-87. Convention Hall in Dacca, Bangladesh, by Louis Kahn (1970). The “Pecile”
at Hadrian's Villa, Tivoli: sketch by Le Corbusier and view.

‘
‘

ya N had

er Py Me a

‘
Meg tee
oa

ay


went with revivalism and the indifference of some avantguardists
toward history are both deplorable and absurd. The historiograph-
ical revolution is an indispensable accomplice of the architectural

revolution.
bd atderpN ra
? a
Y
-
¢
ay
. vee
f .
wo
e . a .?
ar od ~ ”
er , 4
yl 7 en
~ +e ‘ ae . *. . . : -
nN ~»” ~™. ° 77 a“
es Se eer oe Cae bd - “— .
. te . ~ me
aw ~ ~, of o
1 iA le fo _ .
~~ re ose __ {:
- a | . Sk a :
we ied a7 \

h:

88-9] Hadrian's world and Frank Lloyd Wright .44ere general plan of Hadrian's
Villa, Tivoli (cf. 92) Aigér. chapel, plan, and view of Florida Southern College
at Lakeland, designed by Wright (1938-50)

Following pages

92-93 Aernal view of Hadrian’s Villa, Tivoli, with building sectors articulated
by circular hinges and spread over the land Aerial view of Florida Southern
College, Lakeland, designed by Wright in a free, open schema that evokes the
linguistic attributes of the aye of Hadrian


SANs gi

rec ow Soma

ek! |

_ 3, Rae ate et th:

Preced: ry? Pues

94 Medieval street in Perugia. Following the functional listing methodology, it
is tree of any a priori scheme.

Above.

95-96 Prison in Pittsburgh (1884) and Crane Library in Quincy, Massachusetts
(1880), by Henry Hobson Richardson (cf. 42), master of American neo-Roman-
esque, which anticipated the same movement in Holland, led by Hendrik Petrus
Berlage (cf. 104) With neoclassicism and neo-Gothic dominating the Beaux-Arts
system, the Romanesque revival was instrumental in liberating architecture from
the most dogmatic styles

Medievalist Culture, Arts and Crafts, and Neo-Romanesque:
Functional Listing as Design Methodology

John Ruskin (1819-1900) and William Morris (1834-96) headed
the movement to re-evaluate the Middle Ages. British enthusiasm
for the Gothic had been so enduring that it survived far beyond
its own period and continued to thrive through the reigns of
Elizabeth I, the Stuarts, and the four Georges despite the emphasis
put on Renaissance architecture by Inigo Jones and Christopher
Wren. Long before Ruskin published 7he Seven Lamps of Architecture
(1849) and Stones of Venice (1851), Britons had been reading such
widely diffused works as Gothic Architecture Improved (1742), by Batty
Langley; An Attempt to Discriminate the Gothic Styles (1819), by Thomas
Rickman; The Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain and The Cathedral
Antiquities of Great Britain (1807-36), by John Britton. Of particular
importance were the volumes of Augustus Pugin, Specimens of Gothic
Architecture (1821) and Examples of Gothic Architecture (1831), as well
as the more incisive and better known works by his son A. Welby
Pugin, Contrasts; or a Parallel between the Architecture of the 15th and
19th Centuries (1836), True Principles of Chrishan Architecture (1841),
and An Apology for the Revival of Gothic Architecture in Engiand (1843),
which brought the revolt against classicism to the boiling point.
In mid-century, therefore, Ruskin planted his ideas in a terrain
already well seeded; it should be remembered that in 1836 the
classicist Charles Barry, architect for Westminster Palace in Lon-
don, had entrusted the Gothic-style ornamentations of this build-
ing to A. Welby Pugin. It was necessary, however, to give the
medieval revival a different orientation, cutting it adrift from
mystic moralism and secularizing it. To this end, the Romanesque
precedents in Venice and all through northern Italy were of greater
123

value than the impressive cathedrals of France and England. Both
Ruskin and Morris focused on the social and ethical aspects of
medieval expression and stressed its popular character more than
its structural virtuosities. In fact, they belittled the nineteenth-
century engineering feats of Brunel, Paxton, and Eiffel, spurred
onin France by Eugene Viollet-le-Duc’s theoretical contributions,
as we shall see in the next chapter.

Everywhere medievalism proved to be the weapon for tearing
down classicism. Even in a country like Italy, dominated by aca-
demic bias, Camillo Boito prefaced his book Architettura del Medio
Foo in Italia (1880) with a trenchant essay, “On the Future Style
of Italian Architecture,” advancing theses already championed
in England for over thirty years.

In this essay Boito aimed his deadly darts against the architects
of the High Renaissance because they “froze even the charms
and gaiety of country houses with colonnades, frontispieces, and
the bombast of Roman public monuments. These agreeable re-
treats, where man seeks respite from life’s fatigues (how well
Horace discoursed on this subject!) should offer him all the com-
bined pleasures of rest and tranquility; yet, with tiresome punctili-
ousness, those who designed them slavishly copied the exact pro-
portions of Roman monuments, allowing for few spacious rooms,
with windows that seemed to dread the surrounding nature and
extremely high, dark, vaulted ceilings, thus turning delight into
pompous boredom. Whoever wishes to measure the intelligence
sixteenth-century architects applied to their imitations of Roman
architecture should compare Pliny’s villa with one of the most
praised mansions conceived by a great craftsman amidst the
blessed hills of Vicenza, the Rotonda of Capra. He will see that
whereas the Romans invested their houses and villas with organic
unity, in the Renaissance imitations the organism was captive,
indeed it vanished under a preponderant, tyrannical symbolism.
... This was an era of rules and precepts, when architecture
was reduced to mere formulas, in a series of arithmetic relation-
ships, in contrivances of a few pre-established forms. . . . This
apish irrationality soon degenerated into ranting irrationality.”

If this verdict on the sixteenth century and the Baroque sounds
somewhat categorical, Boito’s attack on neoclassicism smacked

of sarcasm: “Architecture did not reach back to its sources, rather
it was content with second-hand erudition, it imitated the imita-
tors. Antonio Canova thought to build a vast and rich temple
at his own expense, as indeed he did at Possagno, his birthplace.
On the fifth of August 1818, he wrote to the architect Giannanto-
nio Selva, ‘I considered it wise to mention it only to a few of
the best architects among us and tell them of my project and
how I planned to execute it, that is, to follow the model of some
famous monument, without adding any other invention to it.’
Selva gave his approval just as the Roman architects and the
San Luca Academy had already done. Soon after, Selva died,
whereupon Canova sought the valued advice of Antonio Diedo,
and explained that the atrium ‘of the church is borrowed from
the Parthenon and the other parts from other ancient temples.’
We need not wonder that Canova was taken with such a passion
for classicism that he would copy idolatrous temples in minute
detail for a Christian church. Nor should it seem strange that
others were of a like mind. But let us take note of Diedo’s reply:
‘In my opinion, the plan leaves nothing to be desired. The facade
is superb, but may I boldly presume to express a doubt? That
is, whether it is right to reproduce the Parthenon and all its defects
without altering it in any minimal part, or whether to make some
small modifications whereby to purge it of those defects. Such
would be, I believe, to narrow the two end intercolumniations.
Nor would I hesitate to make all the intercolumniations equal
by putting the triglyph of the last column on the axis instead
of on the angle.’ This purifier of the Parthenon, whose ignorance
was patently abysmal, was widely acclaimed in the Veneto region
as architect and author of elegant prose. Describing the Church
of the Redeemer in Venice, he cried, ‘Here is the temple that
eclipses all others, even the most exalted and marvelous.’ But
then a worry gnawed at his viscera because the height of the
nave ‘falls by about two feet from the harmonious mean,’ and
commented that this must have been an oversight of the builders
since it was unthinkable that Palladio ‘could have slept over a
matter of such great moment.’ Again, in a speech, Diedo lauded
Selva for writing a ‘dissertation on the Ionic volute, in which
he developed the thoughts of the most renowned architects and

volie than the qupressive cithedraly of Prance and Pagland Both
Mokan sid PAs focused on the sorcal and ethieab aspects of
medieval eepre dan and stressed ahs popubar cheraeter mare than
te tre taral virtueeaties Pro faet, they belittle thre romveteerths
century engunecr ing beaty of Brame Pavton, and baffel, spurred
ont Pranee Ley Paapere Vaollet le Due’. theoretical contrbutiores,
ay owe Sheath cee an thre geet Chrapiter

buerywhere qredevalin proved to be the veeauon for teary
dow chess Even cagntey lke Ttoby, domunated by acs
emue bia, Comullo Borto prefaced bias book Architettara del Merde
livin Maha (VeeO) witha trenebant eswey, “Orn the Future Style
of Thali Arehitectare, advaneiig theses already charnprored
tn balan for Gaver thirty years

In thisewsay Borto simed bie deadly darts aj;cquoct the architects
of the Psjch Penance bec wise they “braze even the churns,
and pouety of country houses with colonmides, frontisgieces, and
the bombast of oman pubbre goormumesnt. Dheve agreeable re
treaty, where qian seeks respite from life’. batiysues Chow well
Ptetce diveoursed on thas vabyeet yy should offer him all the con
bined plewine: of restand tranquibty, yet, with trrevorne prune tyly
oraess, those who desigioed: then SLavediby copied the exact pro
potlions of Rorian montuienty, allowing: bor few cpactoas poormns,
with vandows that seemed te dread the carrourdinys cature anc
eatremely dujch, dark) vaalted ceili, thus turning dediyht inte
pompous boredom VVhoever wiohes toomeqwire the rotelligence
caeteenth century archutects applied te then srutation, of Roman
drehitectare choold compare Piiry’s villa woth one of the meorst
pramed toa. comeerved by a yreat crattyoian amidst the
blessed ball. of Vicenza, the Rotonda of € apres Fle wall see that
Whereas the Pormuns vested then hence and villas wath organs
auty, da the Retiscanee Grbations The onan Wa Captive,
mideed at vanuiched ander a preponcdeniait, tyrannical syribolisns

Thin wee an er oof poles aiid: preeepts, when architecture

war reduced toomere formabis, toa cen of srithrietic relation
Ships om contrivances of a bew pre evtablisded: foros Thue
apich opatonolity soon deyenenited cate canting oratronality 7

ftthus verditon the avteenth century and the Baroque sounds

somewhat Cateponedl, Porto. attack on neochasacasm smacked

of sarcasm: “Architecture did not reach back to its sources, rather
it was content with second-hand erudition, it imitated the imita-
tors. Antonio Canova thought to build a vast and rich temple
at his own expense, as indeed he did at Possagno, his birthplace.
On the fifth of August 1818, he wrote to the architect Giannanto-
nio Selva, ‘I considered it wise to mention it only to a few of
the best architects among us and tell them of my project and
how I planned to execute it, that is, to follow the model of some
famous monument, without adding any other invention to it.’
Selva gave his approval just as the Roman architects and the
San Luca Academy had already done. Soon after, Selva died,
whereupon Canova sought the valued advice of Antonio Diedo,
and explained that the atrium ‘of the church is borrowed from
the Parthenon and the other parts from other ancient temples.’
We need not wonder that Canova was taken with such a passion
for classicism that he would copy idolatrous temples in minute
detail for a Christian church. Nor should it seem strange that
others were of a like mind. But let us take note of Diedo’s reply:
‘In my opinion, the plan leaves nothing to be desired. The facade
is superb, but may I boldly presume to express a doubt? That
is, whether it is right to reproduce the Parthenon and all its defects
without altering it in any minimal part, or whether to make some
small modifications whereby to purge it of those defects. Such
would be, I believe, to narrow the two end intercolumniations.
Nor would I hesitate to make all the intercolumniations equal
by putting the triglyph of the last column on the axis instead
of on the angle.’ This purifier of the Parthenon, whose ignorance
was patently abysmal, was widely acclaimed in the Veneto region
as architect and author of elegant prose. Describing the Church
of the Redeemer in Venice, he cried, ‘Here is the temple that
eclipses all others, even the most exalted and marvelous.’ But
then a worry gnawed at his viscera because the height of the
nave ‘falls by about two feet from the harmonious mean,’ and
commented that this must have been an oversight of the builders
since it was unthinkable that Palladio ‘could have slept over a
matter of such great moment.’ Again, in a speech, Diedo lauded
Selva for writing a ‘dissertation on the Ionic volute, in which
he developed the thoughts of the most renowned architects and

plunged into the most abstruse researches with keen insight.
Thus, architecture was being wasted on the homeopathic purges
of the building it was aping, on the ‘harmonious mean’ and the
‘abstruse researches’ into the Ionic volute.”

Boito was chiding the classicists twice over for their follies,
first for designing buildings like so many boxes, axial, with head-
on perspectives, dreary, antifunctional, and servile to the taboos
of symmetry and proportion; and, second, for systematically be-
traying the very tenets of antiquity by which they professed to
be inspired. They sacrificed both the past and the present to an
ideological a priori and to Beaux-Arts design dogmatism. Boito
called the situation in Italy, where academic conformity reigned,
virtually critical: “We are a restless and lazy people. We take
no trouble to study the ancients, and we battle against the new.
We scorn originality and despise imitation. We are at once skepti-
cal and ridden with prejudices, we are scholars yet we scoff at
philosophy, we are well grounded in our judgments and yet natu-
rally inconstant in our imagination. Classicism has burdened us
with a patrimony of rhetoric, the neo-Catholic school with a
patrimony of sentimentalism tinged with hypocrisy and malig-
nance. These two literary influences, widespread but fortunately
in decline, are ruining our schools and our arts.”

Italian Eclecticism, in fact, never shared that irreverence which
allowed other European and American architects to take the forms
of various periods out of their historical context and blend them
together in pastiches which, however horrible, at least demon-
strated their free will. It was altogether puritan, it would never
sanction any mixture of styles. Boito goes on: “Italian art critics
counsel us to follow the Moorish style in our theaters, the Gothic
in our churches, the Greek in our city gates, the Roman in our

97-99 4fbere auditonnum in the Palace of Catalonian Music, Barcelona (1905),
by Lluis Domenech 1 Montaner, who championed an unorthodox Eclecticism
taking past styles out of their context and mixing them together. Center: water
tank in Leghorn (1809), by Pasquale Poccianti, exponent of “puritan” Eclecticism,
who outhiwed stylistic contaminations Beluw. electric powerhouse at Trezzo
d'Adda (1900), by Gaetano Moretti, the finest example of Italian neo-Romanesque,
which appeared much later than Richardson's in the United States and Berlage’s
in the Netherlands.

(qa

aan

LAU

W


stock exchanges, the medieval municipal in our civic buildings,
English Tudor, Italian, or French Renaissance in our houses, and
so on. A different architecture for every kind of structure. Some
would like to see our cemeteries in Egyptian style, others would
like us to borrow forms and concepts from the Chinese and Turks.
A poet once sang—and with good reason: Toujours | honnéte homme
ouvrit, / La fenétre des vieux dyes / Pour aerer son esprit’ (The honest
man always opens / The window of remote ages / To refresh
his spirit). But we ventilate ourselves so much that a courtesan,
as Shakespeare put it, would catch cold.”

Hence, since a wholly new architecture “‘cannot spring from
an architect’s brain; cannot discard the past altogether; cannot
blend a plurality of styles or ape any one of them; must be na-
tional; must stem freely from a single Italian style of bygone
times but eliminate the archeological aspects of that style to be
completely modern,” what should be selected? “The architect
must feel that he has in hand a style which adapts easily and
responsively to every case; which offers some means of adorning
every nonsymmetrical part of a structure when this is necessary;
which is spared the tedious traits of preconceived forms; which
is free of abstract rapports; which is as rich as need be, yet modest;
which can employ tall, short, thick, or thin columns, high, low,
wide, or narrow windows, mullioned or three-mullioned, cornices
wide and jutting or merely suggested, big, sweeping archivolts
or small, arched lintels, slim pilasters and stout buttresses, arches
strong and soaring or small and slender, delicate ornamentation
and massive foliage; which, in short, uses a language that abounds
in words and phrases, unfettered in its syntax, imaginative and
precise, poetic and scientific, fitting neatly into the expression
of the most diverse and difficult ideas. We can find the essence
of such a language in Lombard architecture and the municipal
manners of the fourteenth century. . . . Indeed, in the Lombard
style, which spread from the northern provinces to central Italy
and the Naples area in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, deco-
rum went together with economy. Constructions in cut stone,
with small pieces and diagonal joints, had need of only small
volumes; geometrical ornamentation and regular foliage were ex-
ecuted with intelligence but not too scrupulously; stone compo-

nents and walls formed a single unit, ruling out keystones, hinges,
and other such appendages which do so much damage to build-
ings. Finally, each part of the whole could stand out by itself,
offering a chance to create singularly beautiful effects. Materials,
labor, and installation were less costly and more useful than in
any other type of architecture. Every ordinary element that could
not be hidden without damage was designed with art: chimneys,
roof gutters, water spouts, tiebeam bolts, conduits, dormers, and
so on. The fourteenth-century municipal style possessed these
virtues. To be sure, we must overlook such effusions as the mosa-
ics of the Cosmati school, the inlays of the Florence Duomo,
the spiral columns, the intricate perforations, the whims and ca-
prices; but, even without them, what riches still remain to draw
from the public palaces, the churches, the cloisters, and the houses
of that great century! We boldly maintain that, over the coming
years, the crude but fecund Italian style we call Lombard for
want of a better term will become the architecture of the new
Italy, however it may be developed, refined, and modernized.”

A masterly diagnosis in disfavor of classicism, Boito’s, but a
weak therapy. Had his prediction come true, Italy would have
leapt to the forefront of the modern movement. In any case,
the fervent exhortation in behalf of the early Middle Ages sprang
from the very same motives as those that impelled William Morris
to champion the Arts and Crafts reform, which called for:

—an aptitude for description; a narrative, flexible design
method. Modern building programs had become more and more
diversified—houses, schools, factories, office blocks, railroad sta-
tions, hospitals, and so forth—but their specific function was
masked behind pseudo-Greek and -Roman grandiosity, or behind
the Renaissance orders, which imposed stern rules on axes, sym-
metry, proportion, and central perspective. Compared with the
magniloquent classicist composition, any medieval street appears
far more varied in its profiles, its outlines and unrepeated rhythms,
appropriate to its functional requirements and dynamics of reality.
In this independence from preconceived norms and stylistic for-
mulas, we discover a pressing ethical commitment to preserve
the close bond between architecture and daily life against the
fatuities of revivalism.

—organic unity. If every element of a building can “stand out
by itself,” then it is rid of the dichotomy that typifies so much
classic architecture: a box with rooms inside and a colonnade
to dress up the box; or, as in Haussmann’s Paris, first fhe facade
and then the structure more or less adapted to it. The Lombard
style rejected Byzantine mosaics as too precious and restored the
value of materials and bare walls, thus capping a trend already
evident in High Middle Ages constructions. Similarly, the Arts
and Crafts movement was first marked in 1859 with the erection
of William Morris’ mansion dubbed “Red House” because it ex-
posed brick—for decades hypocritically concealed under stucco—
to show how the honest use of materials could offer ‘‘a chance
to create singularly beautiful effects.”

—free arrangement of volumes and spaces. Renouncing the
tyranny of horizontal and vertical alignments and repetition in
the placement of windows and doors, architecture projects the
interior spaces in two or three dimensions, that is, on the building
walls and volumes. The pioneers of the modern movement under-
stood that the “picturesque” and ‘‘anecdotal’’ nature of the medie-
val languaye implied a profound commitment to record events
in their individual substance, no longer regimenting them in
Majestic sequences or a priori full-and-empty balances. Taking
their cue from this popular idiom, the Arts and Crafts masters and
their disciples, from Charles Robert Ashbee to Charles F.
Annesley Voysey, worked out a vocabulary which, within a few
years, completely supplanted every figurative remnant of the same
Middle Ages.

—dialogue between structure and shell. Constructions where
“stone components and walls formed a single unit” strongly ap-

100-1) The listing method in the medieval Piazza San Pellegrino of Viterbo (thir-
teenth century) and in “The Pastures” house at North Luffenham, designed by
Charles Fo Annesley Voysey in 1901 Voysey’s work concluded the Arts and
Cratts cycle initiated in 1859 with William Morris’ Red House (cf. 44). The Morris
reform opposed neoclassictsm and its dogmas symmetry, proportion, rhythm,
tull-and-empty balance, aligned doors and windows, and the monumental. It
strove tor a descriptive language of functions and natural materials which, elimi-
nating the Renaissance orders, or ‘set phrases,” gave new semantic value to every
architectural “word ”


pealed to the neo-Romanesque architects determined to cast off
programmatic Gothic and neo-Gothic anatomical structuralism.
Hendrik Petrus Berlage’s Stock Exchange in Amsterdam echoes
Sant'Ambrogio in Milan. On the heavy Lombard walls, full of
deep shadows, the struts and ribs of the crossings are visible
but do not contrast with the brick texture. Similarly, in the Neth-
erlands, iron framings cover a luminous space enclosed by robust
neo-Romanesque walls and connect with them by indented truss
members that disappear into the masonry.

Exposing the structural frame was a medieval lesson that went
beyond Arts and Crafts and the neo-Romanesque movement.
Frank Lloyd Wright, fervent medievalist, used this approach in
his Hickox House (1900) in Kankakee, first step in his crusade
to do away with the “box” and to conceive walls as mere screens
in the continuum between inside and outside spaces. Ludwig Mies
van der Rohe followed suit with obsessive modularity in his IIli-
nois Institute of Technology (1940-56) in Chicago.

The Arts and Crafts leaders, from Morris to Voysey, and the
neo-Romanesques, from Henry Hobson Richardson and John
Wellborn Root to Berlage, fomented a trend, soon spread through-
out the world, to rid architecture of spurious classical precepts.
Even in Italy, stronghold of academism, such men as Boito, Er-
nesto Basile, and Gaetano Moretti gave it their full support. Artists
with creative imagination and indomitable courage abandoned
the archaeological neomedievalism of the nineteenth-century ro-
mantics. They were truly modern poets who mirrored their anxie-
ties in the past. They built and studied, created and explored,
impelled by a passion for the new that drove them to “excavate”

102-4. Romanesque and neo-Romanesque Afore two views of the cross vaults
in Sant'Ambrogio, Milan (second half of the eleventh century). Below. Hall of
the Amsterdam Stock Exchange (1898), by Hendnk Petrus Berlage, whose cultural
role in Europe paralleled that of Henry Hobson Richardson in the United States
(cf 42, 95, and 96)

Fotiowrny pave

105-6 Exposed timber framework in the Cloister Court of Queen’s College, Cam-
bridge (1448). and exposed metal framework in the Alumni Memorial Hall of

- eee

Cid eo
‘ : 4a ~ eee * ’ pa
the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago (1945), by Ludwig Mies van der eh ee” ’ }
Rohe. ' ' ,


buried erudition and bring it back to life. They spoke in terms
of today and reread the past with modern eyes.

Their permanent contribution to the contemporary language
of architecture lies in functional listing as design methodology.
They did away with both grammar and syntax, rules and dogma,
to revive the semantics of words that had lost their true meaning
in the conventional phrases coined by the “orders,” by their super-
impositions and juxtapositions, consonances and proportions. The
list, or inventory of functions, constitutes the basic invariable
of the modern language in architecture: unless he rejects the ta-
boos and the abstract, coercive precepts of classicism, no man
can be a modern architect. Thus, the medieval experience still
offers today the best instrument for shaping a cultured and, at
the same time, popular language, for determining its matrix and
controlling its development.

Preceding Paxe>

107. Aerial view of abbey of Mont-Saint-Michel (1022-1135)

Above

108. The Eiffel Tower (1889), dominating the panorama of Paris.

Followrity pages

109-10 Structural prodigies, Zee vaults over the choir of the cathedral of Amiens
(1220-47) Riytr Galerie des Machines, by Victor Contamin and Charles-Louis-
Ferdinand Dutert, built for the Paris Exhibition of 1889 Its dimensions: length,
1,377 teet; width, 377 feet; height, 157 feet high.

Gothic Historiography, Nineteenth-Century Engineering,
Art Nouveau, Garden Cities: Asymmetry and Dissonance;
Cantilever, Shell, and Membrane Structures

The Gothic revival, pioneered by the Frenchman Eugene Viollet-
le-Duc (1814-79), preceded the neo-Romanesque. Richardson re-
belled against the Beaux-Arts school’s tendency to crystallize
fourteenth-century forms into a “style,” and Berlage followed
P. J. H. Cuypers, who designed the Rijksmuseum (1877), Amster-
dam, in the Gothic manner. Moreover, the Arts and Crafts move-
ment came long after the birth of modern engineering. William
Morris’ Red House was built in 1859, while the first iron bridge,
at Coalbrookdale, England, dates back to 1775. Nevertheless, as
a parameter for a renewed language, the Gothic culture prevailed
during the last decades of the nineteenth century. This may be
demonstrated by comparing two celebrated strongholds of the
new technique. The Crystal Palace (1851) in London marked a
long forward stride in structural evolution, but its ornamental
tracery and Second Empire arabesques were weak and ineffectual.
Inversely, the Galerie des Machines (1889) at the Paris World
Exhibition of 1889 embodied Viollet-le-Duc’s principles, but
stripped them of every archaeological encumbrance.

What features of the Gothic culture attracted modern artists?
There are many, some of them contradictory, including:

—structural framework. Steel and reinforced concrete concen-
trated weights and stresses into isolated supports, thus eliminating
the continuous substaining wall. Immediate, inevitable historical
antecedents of this development were the cathedrals of the Ile
de France, from Notre Dame to Amiens, which illustrate the
progressive atrophy of walls. Vertical elements began to scan vol-
umes and spaces. Between them, immense, luminous openwork

made it possible to pare down the traditionally heavy walls to
thin screens. Innumerable modern buildings, such as Alfred Mes-
sel’s Wertheim Department Store in Berlin, follow the same
approach.

—transparency. At its apex, Gothic architecture provoked a
typical fascinating effect: the brilliant light streaming through
the air-borne dust inundated the building envelope and nullified
the feeling of a boxlike mass. Thus, external and internal spaces
seemed to merge together, and the framework looked much like
a cage, with its sheer lines traced against the sky. Seeking to
recapture this magical dream and struck by the infinite possibili-
ties offered by iron and glass, nineteenth-century engineers split
the landscape into soaring segments, almost measuring the unlim-
ited space. Subsequently, Auguste Perret introduced geometric
fretwork in the churches of Le Raincy and Montmagny, and Lloyd
Wright, son of the Taliesin genius, built a crystal chapel (1951)
at Palos Verdes, California.

—dynamic lines. The composite pilasters of the cathedrals and
the sharply projecting cornices of the fourteenth-century palaces
were invested with a linear dynamism, which Art Nouveau re-
vived. Line is strength, said Henry van de Velde, whose restless,
writhing designs were conceived in terms of Finfuh/ung, that is,
in a physiopsychological function. This concept Victor Horta had
already grasped in his house on the Rue de Turin (1893), Brussels.
Stripping away the stone trappings with which the academics
dressed their iron columns, he left them bare and extended their
lines in vivid, ornamental motives.

Precedt Hal Padres

111-12. The structural skeleton. Left) rampant arches of the cathedral of Chartres
(1194-1220). Right refinery in Texas (1937).

Facing page:

113-14. Transparency. Aber: rose window of the transept in Notre Dame de
Paris (1163-1220) Aelow. insets in reinforced concrete, designed by Auguste Perret,
in Notre Dame at Le Raincy (1922).

Following pages.

115-17. Transparency. Sainte-Chapelle in Paris (1246-48). Interior and side view
of the chapel at Palos Verdes, California (1951), by Lloyd Wright, son of the
Taliesin master.

BD a” => x m2

'

a
a

ow
--—- os &

—_

- #.

& & & & &


voter

my it ‘a?

a

bree 4
9» we or swe .
.

(

-

cue

.
\y
t
Ls
.
’ v

1is-19 Dynamic lines The nave of the Wells Cathedral (1192-1230) and the
glass sault of the winter garden in the house built by Victor Horta on Avenue
Palmerston, Brussels (1895) Atits outset, Art Nouveau reverted to the Gothic
in order to tree the new iron structures of classical constraints, and prolonged
the optical thrust of columns and beams in wriggling ornamental inventions that
animated the entire spatial form) Horta could make even a stone vibrate, as shown
by the ventilating apertures in hus studio at Saint-Galles, Brussels (cf. 43), and
in many details of the Maison du Peuple, his masterwork (ct 13)

—shells and membranes. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centu-
ries, Gothic architecture subdued the dynamic tension, preferring
more complex interlacing often unrelated to the structures them-
selves. In England, we find the vaulted texture of the King’s Col-
lege Chapel in Cambridge. The umbrellalike tracery of the Canter-
bury Cathedral replaced the sprouting pilasters of Salisbury. An
image free of dynamic impulses was produced in the vibrating,
yet static, lines of the Bodleian Library in Oxford. Such emancipa-
tion from the technical data brought about two consequences.
The first, more evident, was negative. Despite its masterpieces,
the late Gothic was so obsessed with intellectual refinements that
it deteriorated more than once into the merely decorative. The
same fate befell Art Nouveau centuries later when it abandoned
Horta’s startling lines and van de Velde’s functional precepts,
only to waste away into the excesses of floral art. This was the
case of Joseph Hoffmann. In 1905 this Viennese architect discov-
ered the secret of the thin, tortile columns at the corners of the
Ducal Palace in Venice: they speed up the refractions of light
and separate the volumetric surfaces, thus dissembling their thick-
ness. These properties Hoffman adapted to the bronzed profiles
of the Palais Stoclet in Brussels, thereby uniting the most disso-
nant elements. But in the Austrian Pavilion at the 1934 Venice
Biennale, he made a half-hearted effort to add tension to a symme-
trical volume designed in the classical manner, with quivering,
corrugated sheathing. The second consequence of the late Gothic
approach, however, is positive and significant for today’s archi-
tects: omitting the dynamic lines, membranes and shells reinte-
grated the building envelope. Similarly, the most advanced mod-
ern structures do not separate the supports from the intermediate
sectors, but rather involve every fiber of the organism in the

120-21. Linear virtuosity Late Gothic devitalized the dynamic concept with a
decorative style exemplified in the church of Santa Barbara at Kuttenberg (1512).
Art Nouveau reached a similar stage, as shown by the railings for the Paris Metro,
desizned by Hector Guimard in 1900

122-23. Membranes and linear shells in King’s College Chapel, Cambridge (1446-
1513), and a geodesic cupola built by Buckminster Fuller for the American Pavilion
at the Montreal Exhibition of 1967. “Hippy” domes followed his example (cf.
223 and 224)

(oY Ge 1.) We 608 -


4

mg
tz

i a-cariet i eee

oC te Cie Ce

ite]

lq
Tr
_——— hl —_— - -

» Ia

,

ye oe

Poth

P2S-2s cer the tertue column at the corner ef the Palazzo Ducale in Venice
itweltth to Atteenth centuries) Aust two views of the bronzed seams that frame
Brussels (1908-11) by Joseph Hoffmann. and
divide them inte bidimensional secters A:ocn Hoffmann s,s Austnan Pavilion at
the Venie Biennale of 1934 The corrugated surface harks back to the Viennese
Art Nouveagu masters sensinvity but the svmmerry ot the puilding indicates
his creative devine

the tayades of the Palars Stociet

molded forms. We see exampies of this in Pier Luigi Nervi’s
cupolas.

—undulating surfaces. Whenever the Gothic spatial continuum
could not make use of dynamic lines and broad ylass expanses,
architects curved exterior walls to temper severe, heavy stereome-
tries. The town halls of Perugia and Siena were designed in this
way to be sensitized to the light, and keep their crenellated sum-
mits in permanent interaction with the surrounding atmosphere.
Art Nouveau, too, abhorred harsh geometric surfaces: the entire
facade of Horta’s Maison du Peuple in Brussels is concave. John
Root used bow windows on the Monadnock Block in Chicago
to relieve the otherwise monotonous rigidity of that giant pile
in a play of interruptions.

—the vertical. Height is the symbol of mystic and human pres-
tige. The industrialists of the nineteenth century sought to com-
pensate for the religious crisis with the cult of money and free
enterprise. The tower of Bruges, the Strasbourg Cathedral, and
Mont-Saint-Michel, designed to emphasize and exalt the church
spire rising high above the town, exemplify the transcendency
of medieval verticalism. Among the corresponding modern struc-
tures, we can cite Alessandro Antonelli’s works in Turin and
Novara; Gustave Eiffel’s famous Tower (1889) in Paris, which
dominates the city; and America’s soaring skyscrapers, varying
in type from the neo-Gothic, such as the Woolworth Building
in New York, to the rationalist masterpiece by George Howe
and William Lescaze, the Philadelphia Savings Fund Society
Building. Frank Lloyd Wright, who declared that his work was
“conceived in the Gothic spirit’ when he introduced it to Europe
in 1910, designed Broadacre City, a horizontal habitat, but also
“The [Hlinots,” a mile-high skyscraper.

129-31, Undulating surfaces The Palazzo Comunale in Perugia (thirteenth to
fourteenth centuries), by Giacomo di Servadio and Giovannello di Benvenuto.
Monadnock Budding in Chicago (1891), by John Root and Daniel Burnham. The
concave front of the Maison du Peuple in Brussels (1890-99), by Victor Horta
Followine pages

132-33 The vertical Tower of the Bruges Town Hall (end of the thirteenth
century) and “The Wlinois,” mile-high skyscraper designed for Chicago by Frank
Lloyd Wright in 1956. See also 107 for Mont-Saint-Michel, and 108 for the Eiffel
Tower

a

8
a
4

i


asymmetry and dissonance. The striking dissimilarities be-
tween the two towers of the Chartres Cathedral; the “early Eng-
lish,” “decorated,” and “perpendicular” chapels audaciously
matched in Great Britain’s churches; and the notorious imbalance
of Arnolfo di Cambio’s Palazzo Vecchio tower in Florence showed
a strong attraction for asymmetry and dissonance, cardinal invari-
ables of the modern language of architecture. Indeed, the Gothic
formulated a methodology of dissonance when, superseding the
one-dimensional scheme of the Christian basilica, it exacerbated
the contrast between the longitudinal distance to the altar and
the visual distance to the cross vaults at vertiginous heights over-
head. Moreover, abbeys and monasteries, especially in England,
were seldom completed. They constantly grew and added new
quarters, but no effort was made to endow them all with a uniform
stvle. Indeed, their differences were often accentuated to a surreal-
istic degree.

The influence of medieval town planning on modern planning
goes beyond a visual and symbolic comparison. In 1889, Camillo
Sitte published Der Stadtebau nach seinen Kunstlerischen Grundsdlzen, a
sort of glorification of urban art in the Middle Ages. Nine years
later, Ebenezer Howard, embalming the nineteenth-century uto-
pias of Robert Owen and Charles Fourier, wrote 7Jomorrow: A Peace-
fui Path to Real Reform, which became the gospel of the new town
planning movement. The notion of the Garden City found imme-
diate historical reference to those centuries ‘‘when cathedrals were
white’ and the network of European settlements was planned
with reckless fantasy and courage.

Howard deplored the hypertrophic expansion of metropolitan
areas, calling instead for satellite communities of about thirty

134-35 Asymmetry and dissonance. Spires of unequal height (377 and 347 feet)
of the cathedral of Chartres (1194-1220) Dissonant volumes in Rockefeller Center,
New York (1931-39), by Hood & Fouilhoux, Reinhard & Hofmeister, Corbett,
Harnson & MacMurray

Fallouiny mages

136-37. Gothic and modern dissonance. A twisted column in the church of Saint-
Severin, Paris (fifteenth century), and model of the Palace of the Third Interna-
tional in Moscow, designed by Vladimir Tatlin in 1920. The helicoidal form of
this building signaled a rupture with the static box of the classicist idiom.

.

3
r
!
4
‘
i
’

thousand inhabitants, economically and functionally autono-
mous. At the same time, Sitte praised the medieval nuclei for
their limited size, their asymmetrical squares and streets, and their
dissonant monuments. Sociology, artistic creativity, and architec-
tural history combined to shape the idea of Letchworth and
Welwyn Garden Cities, the workers’ communities designed by
Bruno Taut and Ernst May, Sabaudia near Rome, the American
“greenbelts,” and finally the New Towns in Great Britain and
Scandinavia—in short, everything positive that was realized in
town planning until the advent of an alternative hypothesis: the
city-region.

ed

Cre Spr e-t~

ia: . . >
ee A ee or es
ee
ee “ow
-
ee oe ee a eR)
civee veway GP PEM
apes
J

138-40. The community dimension. Above New Lanark, near Glasgow, one of
Britain's first workers’ centers, built by Robert Qwen in 1802. Right: aerial views
of Lucignano, a medieval Tuscan agglomerate, and Bram, near Carcassonne.
Following Pilyes.

141-42. fet aerial view of Perugia (cf. 94). Ait aerial view of Welwyn Garden
City, second such community realized, through the initiative of Ebenezer Howard,
by Louis de Soissons and Arthur Kenyon (1919). The British and Scandinavian
satellite towns are an outgrowth of the Garden City concept, formulated by How-
ard at the end of the last century.

Pree: ny phdver

143. The Renaissance decomposing method of design (nave, vaults, ring, cupola,
lantern) in the church of Santa Maria delle Carcert in Prato (1485), by Giuliano
da Sangallo.

Above

144 Neoplastic decompusing in a chair by Gerrit Rietveld, exponent of the De
Stijl Group (1922)

Follnoriy Padye’s,

145-46 Renaissance proportions in a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci, and the
Modulor worked out by Le Corbusier in 1947.

Renaissance and Rationalism: Antiperspective Three-
Dimensionality, Syntax of Four-dimensional Decomposition

A close scrutiny of past records will confirm beyond all doubt
that historical commitment and architectural creativity are inter-
dependent. No link seems to bind the Renaissance revival, fos-
tered, among others, by Jacob Burckhardt in his Die Kultur der
Renaissance in Italien (1880), with the modern rationalism of the
1920s and 1930s. The last vestiges of a Renaissance indoctrination
can be found in the works of the Austrian Otto Wagner, although
he repudiated it in his Moderne Architektur (1895), in the output
of Karl Friedrich Schinkel’s followers, and, to a very limited ex-
tent, in Tony Garnier’s project for “Une cité industrielle,’ dated
1901-4.

Nevertheless, anyone who maintains that modern rationalism
preserves classicist elements—Beaux-Arts in reverse—because of
its muddle-headed aim to devise a universally applicable code
founded on rigid standards puts his finger on a basic question.
The commerce between past culture and contemporary architec-
ture is a dynamic one. It is effective even when hidden behind
a screen of dialectic contradictions. Let us consider the generic
analogies that link twentieth-century rationalism to the Renais-
sance:

—a drastic reduction of linguistic instruments. From the formal
anthology of the Middle Ages, Brunelleschi selected only a very
few elements. He would have nothing to do with marble inlays,
chromatic hedonism, volumetric elasticity, fussy walls, pointed
arches, composite pilasters, structural ostentation, or Gothic
asymmetry and dissonance. Omitting every chance intrusion, he
distilled a lean vocabulary stripped of all such adjectives. In the

197,

post-World War |] years, Le Corbusier, Gropius, Mies van der
Rohe, and J. J. P. Oud did the same; in a parallel move, stoutly
professing to be artists with no need for such expedients, they
made a clean sweep of romantic Eclecticism, Art Nouveau, and
the protorationalism that prevailed between 1900 and 1914. Just
as Brunelleschi had turned his back on the Gothic line, they re-
fused floral decoration. They were inflexibly simple, and their
luminous volumes stood out in the architectural scene for the
deliberate paucity of the means employed.

—-scientific ideology and intellectual control. The discovery of
perspective underlay Renaissance poetics in the same way that
the Cubists’ discovery of the fourth dimension provided the basis
for modern rationalism. The myth of perfect proportion, the appli-
cation of the golden section, the longing to hit on some method
of design that would be valid for any theme whatever, as well
as a didactic mentality united the architectural cycle of the twen-
ties and thirties to the Renaissance. In both cases, poetry was
oriented toward mathematics.

—elementary geometry and stereometry. The plan of Le Corbu-
sier’s Villa Savoye is a square, as are the bays of Brunelleschi’s
portico of the Ospedale degli Innocenti in Florence. Oud’s work-
ers’ housing in Rotterdam has circular street corners, and the
centric system was the Renaissance humanistic ideal. “Pure”
shapes exposed to the light, and therefore immediately legible,
replace the incommensurable values and elaborate patterns of
the preceding periods. Santa Maria della Consolazione in Todi
is a rippling image of spheres and cylinders, isolated from nature.
Le Corbusier’s prisms, resting on pilotis, widen the breach.

147-48 Elementary geometry. Circles, cylinders, and spheres in Rotterdam’s low-
cost housing project. by J JP Oud (1924), and in the church of Santa Maria
della Consolazione in Todi, by Cola di Matteuccto di Caprarola (1508-12).
Eolluct ryt Pdale’s

149-51) Proportional relationships in the Palazzo Bartolini, Florence, by Baccio
d' Aynolo (beginning of the sixteenth century) and in two works by Le Corbusier:
Ozentant’s studic house in Paris (1922) and Maison La Roche in Auteuil, designed
in 1923 (cf 39). The search for the “golden section’’ was common to both the
Renaissance and the rationalist movement between the two warld wars.


These analogies stem from a similar process of dismembering
spatial organisms, volumes, planes, and surfaces. Brunelleschi be-
gan to decompose with his very first work, the portico of the
Innocenti. Did the plan call for a rectangle? He split it up into
a series of squares. What about the elevation? He chose a module,
an arch over a square, and repeated it along the length of the
facade. He was called upon to design a stone facade for the Palazzo
Pitti, a theme with a glorious unitarian tradition in medieval archi-
tecture, brightened by a variety of apertures and dynamic lines.
But he disintegrated the whole by selecting a window module
and repeating it seven times horizontally, then following the same
method vertically and decomposing the height into three equal
parts. What was called the Renaissance ‘superimposition of the
orders” arose from this syntax of decomposition, applied in two
or three dimensions. Examples: the courtyard of the Cancelleria
in Rome and the interior of Santa Maria delle Carceri in Prato.
Even the voids are disassembled into separate entities—the main
nave, secondary naves, transept, pendentives, drum, cupola, lan-
tern, and summit—then juxtaposed or superposed, but nowhere
fused together.

From this architectural code came the need for proportion. No
law must govern the elements of medieval buildings; the func-
tional listing possessed inner corrective capacities within a narra-
tive approach. Renaissance decomposition, on the other hand,
demanded a whole series of rules. How often could the hollow
module of the Innocenti be repeated? Should the Palazzo Pitti
have seven windows or ten? Could the spans of San Lorenzo in
Florence be undefined or must they conform to a stern mathemati-
cal edict? How would the Palazzo Bartolini in Florence have

152-53 Modular composition in the seven central windows of the Palazzo Pitti
in Florence. by Filippo Brunelleschi (1440), and in the Berlin-Dahlem housing
project designed by Wassili and Hans Luckhardt and Alfons Anker during the
rationalist period (1928). Classicism, ancient and modern, proceeds by modules
and repeats them systematically, contravening the invariable of functional listing
which constitutes the basis of a democratic language Windows and living cells
are uniformly repeated, obeying the academic canons. Architectural “words” lose
their speciic semantics in deference to the “orders.”

Len

——
—

“yn

AE

"4

ouus
a

Recah
Soa a

—— tbe
Cepepegedoalagl —E

=

AWG

Ls

Ws

FLL MAU TPL Mrs eerste MLN

or ee 1 Fal

=A


turned out had its composition been altered even slightly? Other-
Wise stated, if vou decompose the whole into modules, how do
you close the sequence of the modules, how do you make it
clear that a building ends at such-and-such a point, not before
and not beyond? It is here that proportion played its role and,
with it, the eurhythmics, the golden number, the pseudoscientific
baggage of consonance, and the expediency of balustrades, friezes,
cymae, cornucopias, lacunars, cornices, tiles, trusses, and es-
cutcheons, which strengthen or weaken the visual weight of the
elements bearing on the proportional rhythms.

Translating the same process into dynamic terms, let us look
at the architecture of the 1920s and 1930s. Expressionism did
not decompose but gave to its three-dimensional masses an explo-
sive kinetic tension, that is, antiperspective and contrary to the
Renaissance procedure. Architectural trends influenced by Cub-
ism, however, preterred to decompose the building box into disso-
nant volumes. Neoplasticism, the De Stijl movement led by Theo
van Doesburg, expounded the tour-dimensional syntax by dis-
membering the volume into free slabs, then reassembling them,
but in such a way as to avoid the static perspective vision. De
Stijl hailed the fourth dimension—time—as the crowning glory
of architectural enjoyment. Poet laureate of this tendency was
Mies van der Rohe, who eliminated every closed binding of spaces
and used a single instrument—the isolated slab—for walls, ceil-
ings, reflector pools, marble sheets, or glass to mark out spatial
fluidity. Another significant artist was Robert Maillart, a modest
Swiss engineer who was unaware of his exceptional stature. Dis-
missing structural exhibitionism, he designed his famous bridges
in simple slabs of reinforced concrete. More sophisticated, Gerrit

154-50 Renaissance perspective and Expressionist antiperspective three-dimen-
sionality Piazza della Santissima Annunziata in Florence (cf 109}, with the church
flanked by Brunelleschi’s portico and by a sixteenth-century copy of it in the
foreground Two sketches for the Alexanderplatz in Berlin, by the Luckhardt
brothers, who used the Expressionist innovations introduced during the early
post-World War I period (1929) For centuries. central perspective suppressed
the three-dimensionality of the urban fabric The Expressionists vindicated it in
an anti-Renaissance key, while De Stijl! aimed for four-dimensional decomposition


Rietveld adopted decomposition even in his chairs, breaking up
traditional forms into small elements, then combining them, but
openly exposing the procedure of their assemblage.

The rationalist taste for pure volumes parallels the Renaissance
need for decomposing the urban continuum typical of the Middle
Ages: no more streets like canals flanked by rows of houses, no
more squares like so many cubes of air marked off by classical
buildings, like so many stage sets. The “free plan,” throwing
off the ball and chain of perspective, is the dominating principle
of the modern vision. It is valuable to city spaces as well as to
interiors.

The fourth dimension, therefore, takes a militant stand against
the three-dimensional inflexibility of classicism, replacing the
static (one fixed viewpoint giving one fixed perspective image)
with movement (infinite viewpoints with as many images). But
the Renaissance and modern rationalism share a theoretical and
analytical anguish so closely that the old and new romantics de- RE —
nounce the intellectual furbelows of both, their pseudological -
nightmares and the icy, catechistic limits of their imagination.
The romantics fail to see the magic of the number and the intoxi-
cating mystique in the dream of golden mean or of four-dimen-
sional dissonance.

a |

bs? ot) The Renatssance three-dimensional and the modern four-dimensional.
lirrer ces the module of the Ospedale degli Innocenti in Florence (cf. 154), by
Brunclleschi (L419). Cdpper ripht and center two views of the German Pavilion at
the Barcelona Exhibition of 1929, by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Below. bridge -- =-

$$ — ; > 7 ;
over the Tschiel-Bach Valley in Switzerland, by Robert Maillart (1925). hee. _ eo i


Preceding rages.

lol Fresco by Giulia Romano in the Room of Grints ot the Palazzo del Te in
Mantuy (1525-34) a Mannerist work dramatically depicting the collapse of the
classical orders

le2 Library of the Faculty of History at Oxtord bs lames Stirling ¢19e8) The
glass roof appears to bear dewn on the balkomes below

Following reyes

lo3-660 Michelangelo's Laurentian Library in Florence (1524-08) and the Mila
House in Barcelona, by Antom Gaudi (1905-10)

Mannerism and Baroque, Organic Architecture: Space
in Time; Reintegration of Building, City, and Landscape

Through the mediation of Mannerism, which broke down Renais-
sance classical ideologies by dismantling their structure of propor-
tions and relationships, the transition to the Baroque brought
reintegration with it. An analogous role was played by the organic
movement, both in the direction taken by Frank Lloyd Wright
after the rationalism of the Chicago School of 1880-93, and in
the European development centering on Alvar Aalto, Scandina-
vian Neo-Empiricism, and the Neo-Expressionist currents in the
post-World War II period. Mannerism and Baroque intersected
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; likewise, in modern
times, Brutalism, a Manneristic phenomenon, followed the or-
ganic. Le Corbusier’s work embodied all three phases. Standard
bearer of rationalism in the 1920s and 1930s, he abandoned it
when he designed the Ronchamp chapel with strong Baroque
overtones. In the La Tourette monastery near Lyons, however,
and in his constructions in Chandigarh, he consolidated “manner.”

In the outcry against the canons of classicism, the voice of
Michelangelo resounded above all others. The stairway in the
Laurentian Library, Florence, bursts upward through the hall with
explosive force. Immense twin columns, embedded in the walls
and seemingly struggling to free themselves, apostrophize the
white surface, marked by regularly spaced sixteenth-century
modules. And the cascading steps contrast strikingly with the
insipid void, in an expressionist complaint against the aseptic
balance of spaces.

In the palaces of the Campidoglio in Rome, Michelangelo
reintegrated volume, emphasizing its total height with gigantic

pillars. Called upon to complete the Palazzo Farnese, he brushed
aside the cautious design by Sangallo and added a colossal cornice,
fully disproportionate because it relates not with the third order
but with the entire facade (the apparently similar impressive cor-
nice of the Early Renaissance Palazzo Strozzi in Florence floats
on a smooth separating strip, in harmony with the tripartition
of the ashlar box below). Furthermore, Michelangelo defied the
Renaissance code with his sweeping designs for the fortifications
of Florence. As with the Capitoline complex, he replaced symme-
try—and a lack of tension—with a compressed trapezoidal void
and gave dynamic force to the piazza by inverting the perspective
alignment. In the apse of St. Peter’s and at the Porta Pia, he
went not only beyond Mannerism but beyond Baroque as well.

Carrying forward a parallel function, modern Expressionism
stirred up a dramatic controversy against the principle of decom-
position and in favor of reintegration. Its foremost exponents
were Antoni Gaudi in Spain and Erich Mendelsohn in Germany.
Numerous works, such as Rudolf Steiner’s Goetheanum in Dor-
nach, near Basel, bear eloquent witness to the exuberance of its
flowing, plastic forms. In Barcelona, the contorted facade of Gau-
di’s Mila House introduced asymmetries never seen before; its
phantasmagoric, modeled contours confound the sky with a series
of gesticulating totems, and its interior spaces seem like hollowed-
out lumps of clay. The Einstein Observatory in Potsdam, bristling
with protuberances and undulations, bursts out of the earth like
a volcano in eruption. In a spectral scenography, Otto Bartning
reunified the exotic, forestlike elements of a sanctuary, weakening
them by using pendulous shapes.

167-73 The antidecomposing controversy provoked by Michelangelo and again,
centuries later, by the Expressionists. Palazzo Farnese in Rome (1546) with its
immense cornice which unifies the superimposed orders The trapezoidal layout
of the Piazza del Campidoglio, Rome, compared with the perspective plan of
the Piazza della Santissima Annunziata in Florence (cf 154) Sketch by Michelan-
gelo for the Florence fortifications of 1529 (cf. 20-28) Below Einstein Tower in
Potsdam, by Ench Mendelsehn (1920). and project for a church by Otto Bartning
(1921), two examples of Expressionism that reintegrate the elements decomposed
through the analytical methodology of rationalism

WN

comets
be -

~~


Introducing powerful dynamics in perspective vision and tem-
porizing the three-dimensional, this revolutionary movement
ruled out as superfluous both the fourth dimension and the de-
composing method of two-dimensional planes and slabs. But a
process of reintegration also affected the language deriving from
Cubism. In the pavilions of the Stockholm Exhibition of 1930,
Erik Gunnar Asplund waived the laws of prismatic rigidity and
the strictures of the T-square in favor of sinuous fluidity and
curves, which promoted a continuing interaction between vol-
umes.

Let us now analyze the church of the Gesu in Rome. Here
the method of decomposing, in the syntactical sense, still survives.
The whole is dismembered into the principal nave, rows of chap-
els, presbytery, transept, cupola, and apse. If, however, we com-
pare it with a fifteenth-century model—even with its exceptional
predecessor, Sant’Andrea in Mantua—we shall understand the
crisis that beleaguered Renaissance conceptions. The atrophy of
the Gesu’s minor naves, replaced by chapels, and the encapsula-
tion of the transept into a cubic volume give full pre-eminence
to the central space, which dominates the interior as the cynosure
of the total image. The passage from harmonic and equivalent
modules to a hierarchic vision brought with it—as Heinrich
Wolfflin amply demonstrated in his Renaissance und Barok (1888)—
a reunification of the fragments from the preceding culture, their
reintegration. A minor Renaissance nave forms an autonomous
perspective image. In Sant’Andrea, too, we find a spatial articula-
tion, whereas the Gesu chapels are entirely secondary to the single
majestic nave. Let us compare the cupola of this Roman church
with Santa Maria delle Carceri in Prato, to take an example. Here

Ia Po Vee Fnk Gunnar Asplund’s pavilions at the Stockholm Exhibition of
1930. 4 crithasm of the rationalist decomposition of volumes. Cenfer. plans of
San Lorenzo in Florence, by Brunelleschi (1423), Sant'Andrea in Mantua, by Leon
Battista Alberts (1470), and the church of the Gest in Rome, by Jacopo Barozzi
da Vignola (1508) Aeeus Cupola of the Gesu by Vignola and Giacomo Della Porta
(150K 73) By redining the lateral naves to chapels, the Gest opposes the tradi-
honal tripartitroning of the Christian church and introduces the question of reinte-
gration, subsequently resolved in the Baroque period

’

- .8.°7. &. Bole Oe


we find the same decomposiny process, in the mechanical sense:
archivolts that define the barrel vaults of the nave and transept,
and a drum resting on a ring. Yet, the ditferences are striking.
The Baroque decoration blends the elements together, while in
Prato the vaults, lunettes, and shining segments accentuate the
separation. The ring in Prato is markedly detached from the side
cornices, while the one in Gesu tends to become fused. More
important, in Rome the diameter of the enormous cupola matches
the width of the nave. Overwhelming in its magnitude, it is antag-
onistic to the eurhythmic laws of the Renaissance since it ignores
consonances and proportion.

As Vignola did in the Gesu, so Aalto boycotted decomposition
in his library at Viipuri. A wooden ceiling undulates over the
rectangular assembly room and extends down to the floor, cover-
ing its backdrop wall. Instead of dismembering the box into six
slabs, Aalto achieved a unity of ceiling and wall. His approach
is manneristic, it confutes rationalism from within through an
organic device that would subsequently influence space concepts.

To return to the Baroque: an aversion to the static was the
natural consequence of a determination to reintegrate. The ellipti-
cal plan, which even such a hesitant artist as Bernini used repeat-
edly, dissociates space into two focuses, giving each element a
double reference. Since the eye is spontaneously drawn from one
focus to the other, the vision becomes kinetic. In Santa Maria
in Campitelli, Rome, Carlo Rainaldi took a more audacious risk
by arranging two contiguous spaces along a longitudinal axis.
Not content with this duality, he fused the two spaces together
through a play of plasticism, intensified at the point where they
join. This expedient, however, still failed to satisfy him. Therefore,
since the far chamber provides a sort of proscenium for the first

177 81 Ades Conterence room in the Viipuri Library, by Alvar Aalto (1930-
35), with its undulating “Mannerist’” wood ceiling, which descends to cover the
wall behind the speaker's area. Cenfer Cupola and ellipsoidal plan of Sant'Andrea
al Quirinale, Rome, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1058). Below. view and plan of
Santa Marta in Campitelli, Rome, by Carlo Rainaldi (1057), with its two chambers
juxtaposed longitudinally. Here reintegration is achieved through the contrast
between a large dark chamber and an adjoining one brilliantly illuminated from
the cupola


and does not draw the visitor to it, Rainaldi gave the two spaces
unequal light values: the first chamber is dark, while the second
is filled with dazzling luminosity. Thus he complemented a di-
mensional dissonance with a dissonance of light.

Similarly, Le Corbusier studded the wall of the Ronchamp
chapel with holes of different sizes and shapes to achieve a bril-
liant, arcane lighting effect.

The interpenetration of spatial figures culminated with Bor-
romini and provided a stimulus for structural continuity. This
was his unequivocal choice, beginning with the church of San
Carlino alle Quattro Fontane. The space he had to work with
was extremely narrow, and this would ordinarily call for a rectan-
gular plan. Such a plan, however, was not acceptable, because
it implied decomposing into the facade wall, the side walls, and
the far wall. A circle? This would have resulted in static uniform-
ity. An oval? Too simple. It would have defied classicism without
disposing of it. Borromini’s solution was highly complex: two
pairs of ellipses, partially overlapping to form a configuration
which shapes a tortuous mural band. One cannot grasp the whole
from any single viewing point, as a constant movement is infused
in this minimal, yet unconfined, space.

The genetics of Sant’Agnese in the Piazza Navona, Rome, can
be traced in three stages:

—act one: the pre-existent church, an ineffective, almost longi-
tudinal scheme;

—act two: the initial plan, recalling Michelangelo’s idea for
St. Peter's. A cupola dominates and compresses the structure be-
low it, with an explosive proportional dissonance over a Renais-
sance double symmetry;

182) Dissonance of light marking the two chambers of Santa Maria in Campitelli,
Rome, by Carlo Rainaldi (cf 180 and 181) Aé the rigit. the first dark chamber,
entered from the piazza; at the (ec? the small chamber inundated with light polarized
on the altar

183. Wall studded with light-admitting apertures in Le Corbusier’s Chapelle de
Notre-Dame du Haut at Ronchamp (1950-51). For other views of this chapel,
see 79 and 80 The quantitative and qualitative diversification of light reintegrates
the architectural space and temporizes the spectator’s vision of it. This diversifica-
tion was used in the Baroque and in the postrationalist periods.


—act three: the final plan, both dilated and contracted, uncon-
tainable within a perspective image, an immense broken profile
that temporizes the space. Let us examine the relationship between
church and cupola. As we enter the building, the widest vertical
visual angle includes the cornice below the drum. Measuring Bor-
romini’s section, we see that it is barely halfway up the astonish-
ing height. This incredible “disproportion” does not allow us to
view the whole from any one position. We must move about
and take time to grasp its dramatic message. The Baroque brings
the object closer to the observer so that he will not mistake it
as something detached, something only to contemplate. The inte-
rior of Sant’Agnese draws him into its vortex; to appreciate it,
he must “live” it actively.

Leaping over the centuries to modern architecture, we have
seen how Asplund’s ‘“Mannerism” provoked the crisis of volu-
metric decomposition, and Aalto’s postulated a reintegration in
the rationalist prism in Viipuri. The Finnish Pavilion at the New
York World’s Fair of 1939 corresponded to Sant’Agnese. Instead
of dividing its quadrangular volume into slabs, Aalto compressed
the space with a cyclopic corrugated wall, in a gesture reminiscent
of Michelangelo. He suppressed every horizontal perspective im-
age, then divided the height into four sections. The lower one
is bottomless, while the other three above it impend on the ob-
server, catching him in rough, turgid, overflowing forms that re-
place the diaphanous surfaces and the precise contours of four-
dimensional rationalism.

The saga of cupolas reached its conclusion with the prodigious
church of Sant’Ivo alla Sapienza, in Rome. It gave the coup de
grace to the Renaissance and Manneristic decomposition method,

lh4-86 Plan of Sant’Agnese in the Piazza Navona, Rome, before the church
was transformed, Borromini’s initial project, and its final form (1653-57).

187 Plan of the Finnish Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair of 1939, by
Alvar Aalto: a diagonal, undulating composition

Following PURVer-

188-92. Interior view and cross section of Sant’Agnese in the Piazza Navona,
and plan of the Palazzo della Sapienza, with the church of Sant’Ivo, by Borromini.
Belew. the Finnish Pavilion in New York (1939) and elements in wood, by Alvar
Aalto.


that is, to the additive process: church + pendentives + cupola
+ lantern. Where is the cupola in Sant’Ivo? It no longer exists.
Its springline is one with the cornice of the chamber below; there-
fore the cupola heightens the building, yet sinks its roots into
it. It represents a total reintegration, as in the Pantheon, but an
anticlassic reintegration which sunders regular space. Indeed,
Sant’Ivo’s geometric matrix is unrecognizable. The hexagon of
the floor has no spatial effect because its sides are molded in
concave and convex shapes. Centrifugal forces not only alternate
with centripetal impulses, but they are hindered in their thrust
toward the outside. The triangles, in the form of the Star of David,
do not altogether fit into the plan, yet they indicate a hypothetical
geometry which, passing through the envelope of the church,
finds its completion only outside the envelope. Borromini’s genius
made this miracle possible by imbuing a central organism with
thrilling dynamism.

Every aspect of the Baroque language answers the same pur-
pose. Consider, for example, the question of vertical communica-
tion. During the Renaissance, the stairway, a separate product
of decomposition, was encaged in a recess because its continuity
in height was considered incompatible with the superimposition
of the orders. Even in the full tide of the sixteenth century, the
stairway in the Palazzo della Sapienza was relegated to one of
the many rectangles that divide the structure; it is therefore wholly
hidden from the courtyard, and it leaves no mark on the facade.
This system came to an end with the helicoid of the Palazzo
Farnese in Caprarola, anticipated by the spiral stairway of the
Vatican Belvedere, just as Sant’Andrea prophesied the Gesu. With
the advent of the Baroque, the sixteenth-century box opened
up. In the loggia of Palazzo Barberini, external space swept into
the main entrance, with its vast pincers ramps. It was the first

193-95. Abore, let elements in undulating wood, by Alvar Aalto. Above, right:
cross section of Sant’Ivo alla Sapienza, Rome (1642-60), where Borromini reinte-
yrated the church and its cupola, defying Renaissance decomposing methodology
Below. view of the cupola of Sant’lvo. The base of the cupola coincides with the
trabeation of the church, contrary to Renaissance and Mannerist practice—as,
tor example, in Santa Maria della Carceri, Prato (cf. 143); the Gest, Rome (cf.
176), and Borromini’s Sant’Agnese in the Piazza Navona, Rome (cf. 188 and 189).


of the grandiose stairways which—from the Palazzo Madama in
Turin to Vanvitelli’s Reggia in Caserta—demonstrated the vertical
reintegration against the broken-up system of the classical orders.

Having seen the architectural components reunified, we pass
on to the reintegration of the city and its buildings. Bath, England,
projected Borromini’s undulating wall on the urban scale. The
Baroque serpentine fused cavities, bends, and retreats in endless
blocks, unifying the different parts through the agency of light.
If one curving section gets the light, the second remains in shadow,
the third dazzles, and the fourth stands in the half-light. There
are no longer sharp caesuras between dark and light but rather
a gradual, homogeneous transition.

The serpentine idea returned to the architectural scene as a
feature of the dormitories designed by Aalto for the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Instead of being confined within an inter-
nal vertical tube, the stairs cut across the entire outside wall facing
the campus and reunify the superposed floors as they rise. Thus,
Aalto created a stairway-corridor that supplanted the habitual
decomposing movement in horizontal (corridors) and vertical
(stairway) traffic.

The Piazza di Spagna in Rome dispenses with every connotation
of the Renaissance idiom. It repudiates the symmetrical void that
stamps the Piazza dell’Annunziata in Florence and even the Cam-
pidoglio in Rome, bordered by identical buildings, with a church
or monument in front and vistas encompassing the whole scene.
Separated into two interpenetrating triangles, the Piazza di Spagna
blends rhythmically from one into the other. The narrow part
in the middle opens up into the Spanish steps, which ascend to
Trinita dei Monti, or canalizes into the opposite shaded split of

19%)-99 Altitudinal reintegration in Baroque and organic architecture. A doze: small
stairway in the fifteenth-century Horne House, Florence, attributed to Simone
del Pollaiolo, and spiral stairway in the Palazzo Farnese at Caprarola, by Jacopo
Baroszi da Vignola (1547-59) Center grand stairway in the Reggia at Caserta,
by Luigi Vanvitell: (1752-74). Below. stairway-corndors in Aalto’s dormitories at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge (1947-48).

Following fied tes

200-2. Serpentine volumes Aalto’s MIT dormitories, Cambridge, Massachusetts
(1947-48), Landsdown Crescent, Bath (1794), Paper Mill at Fors, by Ralph Erskine
(1953)

Ped


Via Condotti. An extraordinary, antiperspective invention, this
piazza is not a formally isolated component of the city, but
rather a magnet for converging and dispersing traffic in various
directions.

The Piazza del Quirinale effaces every geometric pattern and
rigid stereometry of empty urban space. There is no correlation
between its flanks, therefore no symmetry. A void without any
strict design, it is the terminus of the long, straight Via XX Set-
tembre (once Strada Pia, outlined by Michelangelo), and the start-
ing point of the descent to the Piazza Venezia and the Corso.
Following the direction of the palace’s facade, in the distance
we can see St. Peter’s loom up over the panorama. The surround-
ing buildings abide by no right-angle rules; therefore their facades
give off infinite tonalities and nuances of light. At any hour of
the day, the Piazza del Quirinale assimilates and conveys the
total range of light.

Nothing can be reintegrated before it has been decomposed.
The Baroque urban continuum detached facades from the build-
ings in such a way that they became mere street backdrops. Two
examples of this, among many, are the fronts of Sant’Agnese,
Piazza Navona, where Borromini curved the wall expanse, and
the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, with its broad, palpitating
arches emphasized by the side strips. The San Carlino facade
negates the corner of the Quattro Fontane in order to emphasize
the street axis. The convexities of Sant’Ivo’s drum are in disso-
nance with the concave lower part of the church, which is con-
nected with the sixteenth-century portico. To achieve reintegra-
tion, the compact Renaissance volume was attacked by the double
assault of internal spaces and urban continuum.

Organic architecture relates to the rationalism of the 1920s and
1930s just as did the Baroque to the Renaissance. It was the same

203-8. Aheze aerial view and plan of the Piazza di Spagna, Rome, formed by
two triangles joining at their apexes Cerfer, aerial view and a 1676 drawing of
the Piazza del Quirinale, Rome, conforming to the directions of the urban traffic
flaw, hence tree of geometric preconceptions and parallel alignments. Below. two
details of Boston’s City Hall Plaza, by Paul Rudalph, a project influenced in
part by medieval urban centers and, to a great extent, by the dynamic schemes
and kinetic values of the Baroque cities (1963-71)


linguistic phenomenon, but with a notable difference: the Baroque
reintegrated the three Renaissance dimensions, while the organic
reintegrates the four dimensions of Cubism. The Baroque was
concerned with undulating walls and street backdrops; organic
architecture with spaces and volumes of the city-region.

From the beginning of our century, Frank Lloyd Wright—prof-
iting from a rationalist experience that matured in the United
States thirty years ahead of Europe—became the prophet and
genius of the organic trend. He extolled the horizontal, the ground
line, unfinished materials sometimes crude and telluric, and the
house anchored in the soil as a factor of a reintegrated landscape.
From the language of his master, Louis H. Sullivan, he removed
every classical residue, such as isolated volumes, waxed surfaces,
sharp contours, crystal purity, and abstract geometrics. In the
Roberts House (1908) in River Forest, Illinois, Wright built a
living room two stories high. Forty years later, for the Guggenheim
Museum in New York, he designed a grand helicoidal ramp to
serve as both a stairway-corridor and a street-structure.

Compared with present-day architecture, including the most
daring works, the high spots of organic poetics—Wright’s Falling
Water (1936) in Bear Run, Pennsylvania; the Johnson Building
in Racine, Wisconsin; and Taliesin West, Arizona—belong to the
future. They incorporate all the invariables of the modern code:
listing, dissonances, antiperspective three-dimensionality that
discounts Cubist doctrines; four-dimensional decomposition, with
Wright as the father of De Stijl neoplasticism; cantilevered struc-
tures, with Falling Water as their supreme example; space-in-
time; and reintegration of building, city, and landscape. Fifty years
before anyone else, Wright foresaw that the automobile would
destroy the traditional antinomy between urban nuclei and the

aon

_

209-12 Reintegration of land- and cityscape in the Baroque period and in the
organic architectural trend. Aerial view of Santa Maria Maggiore, Rome, with
the fagade by Ferdinando Fuga, inserted into the building block (1736). Three
works by Frank Lloyd Wright: Midway Gardens, Chicago (1914); Taliesin West,
Arizona (1938); Price House, Bartlesville, Oklahoma (1955).

Follows ry Pilger.

213-15. Piazza Navona in Rome, with the curvature of Sant’Agnese in Agone,
by Borromini. Two views of the Johnson Administration Building, Racine, Wis-
consin, by Wright (1936).


countryside. In his Broadacre City project, he proposed urbanizing
the entire region, providing for fulcrums of powerful density ver-
tebrated by mile-high skyscrapers that hark to the future.

The principle of reintegration qualifies every valid contribution
today. Two examples are Habitat ‘67 in Montreal, by Moshe
Safdie, and John Johansen’s Mummers Theater in Oklahoma City.
Both structures, assemblages of cells and communication tubes,
are open, unfinished, absorbing the city space within their organ-
isms in an uninterrupted dialogue of internal, external, private,
and public voids. With Wright, a new architectural language was
born. However exasperatingly slow its assimilation may be, it
has put its stamp on all contemporary research and trends.

210-17 Spatial temporizing and reintegration in Sant'Ivo alla Sapienza, Rome
(1o42-00), by Francesco Berromini. Spatial tempurizing and building-city reinte-
gration in the Guggenheim Museum, New York (1946-59), by Frank Lloyd Wright
For a comparison between the helicoids of these two works see 30 and 31. The
extraordinary affinity between Borromini and Wright 1s particularly surprising
in that the genius of Tahesin almost ignored the Baroque master.

al
‘aad


frei eidnty Mayes

218) Aerial view of Matera, in southern Italy, with the inhabited areas known
as 'T Sasst’—a dramatic document ef prehistoric lite that has survived to the
present

219 A might view of Las Vegas, striking, example of a culture reduced to the

nadir Pop architecture and Pop planning

FOcieuny [bytes

220-21 A primitive village of the Dogon tribe in Malt, West Africa, Barrtuda.
in lama, Peru, today

Conclusion:
Prehistory and the Zero Degree of Architectural Culture

Historiography, revivals, and the modern language are the three
keys we have used to examine the architectural evolution from
the monuments of ancient Greece to the Baroque period. We
have seen that, on the one hand, erudite probes into the past
have incited orgies of stylistic eclecticism, whose only merit has
been to overthrow the despotism of neoclassicism. On the other,
however, research into history has nurtured modern culture with
a feedback, the more incisive the less it is evident.

What now remains is to review the eons of prehistory, the
architecture of hundreds of thousands of years before the inven-
tion of writing. Side by side with recorded history, prehistory
has continued to exist. It is with us even today in countries still
technologically primitive, in backward rural areas, and, to some
extent, in the anonymous buildings of the city slums—in short,
wherever professional architects are, and have been, missing, and
kitsch dominates the scene. Here is an immense patrimony that
ranges over millennia, from the primitive settlements of paleo-
lithic times to the gaudy neon signs of Las Vegas, encompassing
vernaculars, spontaneous, exotic idioms and dialects, language
forms extraneous to the official codes. Even shanty towns im-
planted on mounds of refuse deposited by our industrial society
can be considered primitive entities, brought to our aesthetic at-
tention by Pop Art.

Interest in prehistory and primitive architecture has mounted
considerably over the past decades. Why? Once again, the motives
are both creative and critical. The study of regions, landscapes,
and minor settlements and the growth of urban research have

219

led us to recognize the values of “architecture without architects,”
of humble environments and simple social fabrics. Unless we
know and understand them, we shall fail to grasp the context
that underlies the emergence of major monuments. Indeed, there
are sublime achievements, like the Piazza del Campo in Siena
and the Piazza di Spagna in Rome, which boast no buildings of
any special importance, and splendid cities, Ferrara for one, cre-
ated by architects of modest stature. Since modern planning em-
braces the whole physical gamut of human communities, it is
only logical that in its investigations it should include “out-of-
time’ aggregates, Aurrtadas and tivelas. hovels and shanties—every-
thing that art historians have thus far disdainfully banned from
their books.

Architects have another, more profound, reasen for consulting
prehistory. In an epoch of hasty, feverish building activity, when
linguistic codes age without maturing and submit to wanton abuse
even before they have been formalized, they revert to the original
sources, to the habitat of uncivilized man and the underprivileged
who live like aborigines within the metropolitan magma. Sickened
by the crude expedients and superficial forms he sees around
him, the architect, to use Roland Barthes’ terms, descends to the
“zero degree” of his culture and tries to adapt his work to the
popular idioms. Such a “hippy” operation is pregnant with ambi-
guities and illusions, yet it is healthy all the same. To be sure,
every architectural revolution begins by rejecting the official code
and leveling it to the nadir. In different ways and to different
degrees, Brunelleschi, Michelangelo, and Borromini did just that.
Also Gaudi, inspired by the grattoes of Almeria and the caves;
Wright, in the Ocotillo Desert Camp (1927) near Chandler, Ari-
zona; Mendelsohn, when he discovered the “architecture of

222-25 tere Neolithic village of Ba Ila in Northern Rhodesia. Center: two views
of peodeste domes in the “hippy” community of Drop City in Trinidad, Colorado.
Bei. Habitat ‘67, Montreal, by Moshe Safdie.

Fol Horey Padaes

226 Matmata village in southern Tunisia, with craters converted into living quar-
ters underground cavities put to domestic use by cavemen.

227-31 “Architecture of the dunes,” five sketches by Erich Mendelsohn, dated
1920 The Expressionist vision finds incentives in a landscape constantly varied
by the sweeping wind


dunes”; and Le Corbusier who, at Ronchamp, denied the five
principles laid down in 1921. Satdie, too, demolished the prevail-
ing code when he transplanted a Middle Eastern village into Can-
ada together with the community spirit of the Kibbutz, and Johan-
sen when he piled junk upon junk to build his Mummers Theater,
In the same category we can also include the works of the m/orme/
trend, the pseudotroglodytic volumes and “sculptured spaces”
ot Andre Bloc, the open-ended structures by Frederick Kiesler,
Claude Parent's oblique projects, and the so-called “earth
architecture.”

More and more we train our sights on prehistory as our illusions
about the future of the technological society ebb away, as we
awake to the extent of the ecological disasters besetting our planet,
to the piyantism that abenates man trom his tellow men and
his surroundings, to the bureaucratic process by which the indi-
vidual is reduced to a contormity deprived of quality. Modern
painting, nods approval of primitive yvestures and instant actions.
Alberto Burri and Robert Rauschenberg exhibit rags in sophisti-
cated museums. Modern music welcomes the aesthetics of noise
and aleatory techniques. The vouny exist by improvisation and
clothe themeselves in tatters in the belief that they are bringing
art into their lives,

Psychoanalysis and anthropology examine the behavior, to-
tems, symbols, and taboos of primitive peoples to single out those
elementary and instinctive needs that mechanized civilization has
repressed In architecture. too, the “zero degree” means to repose
all the basic questions, much as i we were to build the first
house in history Is the metropolitan aggregate, jam-packed with
millrons of dwellers, compatible with the survival of the individ-

Dal 88 fwo views of the Mummers Theatre Oklahoma City (1971), by John
Johunsen architectural conventions demolished an assemblage of scraps and
Wreckage. actren architecture built out ob (pieces and circurts

234) Davellinys at Metanteur southern Tunisia, which repropose man’s prehistone
existence in natural caves

235 30° Villa aronida near Gland) Swatverland) by Robert Frer, Christian Hun-
Aer and Hlengs Presser (h8edy Model tor a recreational center near Chambery,

Savore by Pascal HLausermann (1@67)


ual? What are the fimits of social tolerance beyond which eco
nonuc development becomes suicidal? Do the paths and tracks
of the archaic village postulate the yeometric street chessboard,
subsequently canonized by Pfippoduanius of Miletus, or are we
better off with systems that discard riyht angles and squares?
Does Wright's principle, “the house as shelter,” reflect the urgency
of our forebears to yo undersround, a desire evidenced repeatedly
over the centunes i subterranean temples, in the catacombs, in
Renaissance and Baroque yrottoes, and tn contemporary basement
nightclubs? Oris the principle of pilotis, the house on stilts,
championed by Le Corbusier, more valid, as prehistoric pile dwell
mys seem to show? And ayer does not the wall enveloping,
Interior space without panels juxtaposed at riyght angles and
stitched together as we find in Capri, Positano, Ravello, and
Amaltt, in the domed coots of the Ligurian Riviera; and in the
cone shaped stone mafof Apulia offer an organic unity prefera-
ble to Renmassanee and De Stil decomposition? And does not
the fusion of house and street, as in the cave dwellings of Matera,
suyyest a precedent for the trend toward remteyration? Do not
the dolmens and tmenhirs strewn over prehistoric sectors, and
the mysterious cums of Stonehenge in bnyland, testify that monu-
mentality i deeply rooted in the burma soul?

Atchitects are assailed by innumerable questions that demand
screntific answers, Phas is not a matter of reyressing to romantic
attitudes out of amystical fascination with a legendary past but,
onthe contrary, of putting the dialogue between art and criticism
on asystemathe basis. This dialogue requires energy and courage,
aorereading, of prehistory and history so that we can write and
speak the modern language of architec ture.

24% Model forthe Roosewell Memorial Washington 12. by William F Peder
son uel Brodbord S  dilmey This proayeet won the P8eo competition a crown of
Vprehe tone otelae wath plato creat an altitudinally stazgered podium
bility er Padates :

236 Aerial view of the vo called Tenmiple ot the Sun at Stanchenge, near Salisbury
Ts omost sperctecuhee ad all prehistone monuments is ascribed to the era between
Mound (bow) When interest in prehistory as urumune from aihilist romanti-
csi, dooffers a valid and fertile source of verhcation tor modern architecture

