BOOK Nikolaus Pevsner Pioneers of Modern Design.pdf
Nikolaus Pevsner

PIONEERS OF
MODERN DESIGN

FROM

WILLIAM MORRIS
TO

WALTER GROPIUS

Penguin Books

1 - Theories of Art from Morris to Gropius

‘ORNAMENTATION’, says Ruskin, ‘is the principal part of architec-
ture,’ It is that part, he says in another place, which impresses on a
building ‘certain characters venerable or beautiful, but otherwise un-
necessary’. Sir George Gilbert Scott amplified this surprising statement
when he recommended to architects the use of the Gothic style, because
its ‘great principle is to decorate construction’,}

How this basic doctrine of nineteenth-century architectural theory
worked out in practice could not be shown more convincingly than by
retelling the story of the new British Government offices in Whitehall,
London, as erected by Scott between 1868 and 1873. The following are
the facts as told by Sir George. His original plans were in the Gothic
style. He writes: ‘I did not aim at making my style ‘Italian Gothic”;
my ideas ran much more upon the French, to which for some years I
had devoted my chief study. I did, however, aim at gathering a few hints
from Italy . . . I mean a certain squareness and horizontality of outline
... I] combined this . . . with gables, high-pitched roofs and dormers.
My details were excellent, and precisely suited to the purpose.’ In spite
of this, Scott did not win the first prize in the competition, partly be~
cause Lord Palmerston thoroughly disliked medieval styles. Scott com-
ments: ‘I did not fret myself at the disappointment, but when it was
found, a few months later, that Lord Palmerston ‘had coolly set aside
the entire results of the competition, and was about to appoint Penne-
thorne, a non-competitor, I thought myself at liberty to stir.’ And stir
he did, so that in the end he was appointed architect to the new building.
However, he was not able to dissuade the Government from its pre-
dilection for the Italian Renaissance. What followed was described by

Lord Palmerston as the battle of the Gothic and Palladian styles. He
saw no insurmountable difficulty. He sent for Scott and told him ‘in a
jaunty way that he could have nothing to do with the Gothic style, and
that,’ continues Scott, ‘though he did not want to disturb my appoint-
ment, he must insist on my making a design in the Italian style, which
he felt sure I could do quite as well as the other’, Lord Palmerston was
evidendy right, for, after long arguments, Scott promised ‘an Italian
design’. But he still hoped that Renaissance could be avoided. He
altered the front of his building, and now it was ‘in the Byzantine of
the early Venetian palaces . . . toned into a more modern and usable
form’. In vain, for the Prime Minister wanted ‘the ordinary Italian’,
and he would have it. He called the new plans ‘neither one thing nor
vother — a regular mongrel affair’, and threatened to cancel Scott’s
appointment. After that, for the sake of his family and his reputation,
Sir George ‘in sore perplexity’ decided to ‘swallow the bitter pill’.
He ‘bought some costly books on Italian architecture and set
vigorously to work’ to invent an Italian facade ‘beautifully got up in
outline’.®

The campaign of William Morris’s lifetime was directed against the
complete lack of feeling for the essential unity of architecture which
made this comedy possible. When his impressionable nature began to
react on buildings, fine art, and industrial art, almost all contemporary
building which surrounded him, as a youth in London and as a student
at Oxford, and practically all industrial art was crude, vulgar, and over-
loaded with ornament. Examples will be given later. Responsible for
this state of affairs were the Industrial Revolution and — less known but
equally important — the theory of aesthetics created since 1800. ‘lhe
part played by the Industrial Revolution is to be discussed in Chapter 2.
It is sufficient here to say that manufacturers were, by means of new
machinery, enabled to turn out thousands of cheap articles in the same
time and at the same cost as were formerly required for the production
of one well-made object. Sham materials and sham techniques were
dominant all through industry. Skilled craftsmanship, still so admirable
when Chippendale and Wedgwood were at work, was replaced by
mechanical routine. Demand was increasing from year to year, but

demand from an uneducated public, a public with either too much
money and no time or with no money and no time.

The artist withdrew in disgust from such philistinism or squalor, It
was not for him to condescend to the taste of the majority of his fellow-
men, to meddle with the ‘Arts Not Fine’. During the Renaissance,
artists had first learned to consider themselves superior beings, bearers
of a great message. Leonardo da Vinci wanted the artist to be a scientist
and a humanist, but by no means a craftsman. When Michelangelo was
asked why he had portrayed one of the Medicis in the Medici Chapel
beardless, though he had worn a beard in life, he answered: ‘ Who, in
a thousand years, will know what he looked like?’ However, this attitude
of artistic presumption remained exceptional until the end of the eight-
eenth century. Schiller was the first to form a philosophy of art which
made the artist the high priest in a secularized society. Schelling took
this up, and Coleridge, Shelley, and Keats followed. Poets, according
to Shelley, are ‘the unacknowledged legislators of the world’. The artist
is no longer a craftsman, no longer a servant, he is now a priest. Human-
ity may be his gospel, or beauty, a beauty identical with truth (Keats),
a beauty that is ‘the completest conceivable unity of life and form’
(Schiller). In creating, the artist makes conscious ‘the essential, the
universal, the aspect and expression of the in-dwelling spirit of Nature’
(Schelling). Schiller assures him: ‘The dignity of Mankind is laid into
thy hands’, and compares him to a king - ‘both living on the summits
of mankind’. The inevitable consequence of such adulation became
more and more visible as the nineteenth century unfolded. The artist
began to despise utility and the public (Keats: ‘Oh sweet fancy! let her
loose; Everything is spoilt by use’). He shut himself off from the real
life of his time, withdrawing into his sacred circle and creating art for
art’s, art for the artist’s, sake. Concurrently the public lost understand-
ing of his personal, outwardly useless utterances. Whether he lived like
a priest or lived a wie de Bohéme, he was ridiculed by most of his con-
temporaries, and extolled by only a small set of critics and connoisseurs.

But there had been a time when nothing of all that existed. In the
Middle Ages the artist was a craftsman, proud of executing any com-
mission to the best of his ability. Morris was the first artist (not the first

thinker, for Ruskin had preceded him) to realize how precarious and
decayed the social foundations of art had become during the centuries
since the Renaissance, and especially during the years since the Indus-
trial Revolution. He had been trained as an architect and as a painter,
first in the Gothic studio of Street, and then in the circle of the Pre-
Raphaelites. But when, in 1857, he had to furnish his first studio in
London, the thought struck him that before one can settle down to
paint elevating pictures, one must be able to live in congenial sur-
roundings, must have a decent house, and decent chairs and tables.
Nothing was obtainable that could possibly satisfy him. This was the
situation which all of a sudden awakened his own personal genius: if
we cannot buy solid and honest furniture, let us make it ourselves. So
he and his friends set out to build chairs ‘such as Barbarossa might have
sat in’ and a table ‘as heavy as a rock’ (Rossetti). The same experiment
was repeated when Morris had a house built for his wife and himself,
the famous Red House at Bexleyheath. Ultimately, in 1861, instead of
forming a new exclusive brotherhood of artists, such as the Pre-
Raphaelite Brotherhood had been, and such as he had wished to found
when he was studying at Oxford, Morris made up his mind to open a
firm, the firm of Morris, Marshall & Faulkner, Fine Art Workmen in
Painting, Carving, Furniture, and the Metals. This event marks the
beginning of a new era in Western Art.

The fundamental meaning of Morris’s firm and Morris’s doctrine
is clearly expressed in the thirty-five lectures which he delivered be-
tween 1877 and 1894 on artistic and social questions.* His point of
departure is the social condition of art which he saw around him. Art
‘has no longer any root’. The artists, out of touch with everyday life,
‘wrap themselves up in dreams of Greece and Italy ... which only a
very few people even pretend to understand or be moved by’. This
situation must seem exceedingly dangerous to anyone concerned with
art. Morris preaches: ‘I don’t want art for a few, any more than
education for a few, or freedom for a few’,® and he asks that great
question which will decide the fate of art in our century : ‘ What business
have we with art at all unless all can share it?’? So far Morris is the true
prophet of the twentieth century, We owe it to him that an ordinary

man’s dwelling-house has once more become a worthy object of the
architect’s thought, and a chair, a wallpaper, or a vase a worthy object
of the artist’s imagination.

However, this is only one half of Morris’s doctrine. The other half
remained committed to nineteenth-century style and nineteenth-
century prejudices. Morris’s notion of art derives from his knowledge
of medieval conditions of work, and is part and parcel of nineteenth-
century ‘historicism’. Proceeding from Gothic handicraft, he defined
art simply as ‘the expression by man of his pleasure in labour’. Real
art must be ‘made. by the people and for the people, as a happiness for
the maker and the user’.* The pride in artistic genius and some special
form of inspiration, which he saw in all the art of his time, was therefore
abhorrent to him. ‘That talk of inspiration is sheer nonsense’ he said;
‘there is no such thing: it is a mere matter of craftsmanship,’!°

It is obvious that such a definition of art removes the problem from
aesthetics into the wider field of social science. In Morris’s mind, ‘it is
not possible to dissociate art from morality, politics and religion’.1!
Here, above all, he proves a faithful follower of Ruskin who in his turn
owed a debt, just a little too emphatically denied, to Pugin, that brilliant
designer and pamphleteer who in the years between 1836 and 1851 had
fought violently and relentlessly for Catholicism, for Gothic forms as
the only Christian forms, and also for honesty and truthfulness in
design and manufacturing. Ruskin took up the latter causes but not the
former. Among the Seven Lamps of Architecture, his book of 1849, the
first is the lamp of sacrifice, that is the dedication of a man’s craft
to God, and the second the lamp of truth. Truth in making is to
Ruskin making by hand, and making by hand is making with joy.
Ruskin also recognized that here lay the two great secrets of the Middle
Ages and preached the superiority of the Middle Ages over the
Renaissance.

In all this Morris followed him, and both were led to forms of
Socialism along this path. If Morris denounced the social structure of
his time so eloquently, his main reason was that it is evidently fatal to
art. ‘Art... will die out of civilization, if the system lasts. That in itself
does to me carry with it the condemnation of the whole system.’!* Thus

Morris’s Socialism is far from correct according to the standards estab-
lished in the later nineteenth century: there is more in it of More than
of Marx. His main question is: how can we recover a state of things
in which all work would be ‘worth doing’ and at the same time ‘of
itself pleasant to do’?!> He looked backward, not forward, backward
into the times of the Icelandic sagas, of cathedral building, of craft
guilds, One cannot, from his lectures, obtain a clear view of what he
imagined the future to be. ‘The whole basis of Society . . . is incurably
vicious,’ he wrote.'4 Hence it was sometimes his only hope ‘to think of
barbarism once more flooding the world . . . that it may once again be-
come beautiful and dramatic withal’.!® And yet when, partly as a
consequence of his own Socialist propaganda, riots began in London
and revolution seemed for a moment not unlikely, he recoiled and
gradually withdrew back into his world of poetry and beauty.

This is the decisive antagonism in Morris’s life and teaching. His
work, the revival of handicraft, is constructive; the essence of his teach-
ing is destructive. Pleading for handicraft alone means pleading for
conditions of medieval primitiveness, and first of all for the destruction
of all the devices of civilization which were introduced during the
Renaissance. This he did not want; and since, on the other hand, he
was unwilling to use any post-medieval methods of production in his
workshops, the consequence was that all his work was expensive work.
In an age when practically all objects of everyday use are manufactured
with the aid of machinery, the products of the artist-craftsman will be
bought by a narrow circle only. While Morris wanted an art ‘by the
people and for the people’, he had to admit that cheap art is impossible
because ‘all art costs time, trouble and thought’.’* He thus created
art — though now applied art, and no longer the nineteenth-century art
of the easel-picture ~ which was also accessible to a few connoisseurs
only, or, as he once expressed it himself, art for ‘the swinish luxury of
the rich’.!17 No doubt Morris’s art has in the end beneficially affected
commercial production in many trades, but that is precisely what he
would have hated, because the diffusion of his style on a large scale
involved reintroducing the machine, and thereby expelling once more
the ‘joy of the maker’. The machine was Morris’s arch-enemy: ‘As a

condition of life, production by machinery is altogether an evil.’!® Look-
ing forward to barbarism, he certainly hoped for machine-breaking,
though in his late speeches he was careful (and inconsistent) enough
to admit that we ought to try to become ‘the masters of our machines’
and use them ‘as an instrument for forcing on us better conditions of
life’.19

Morris’s attitude of hatred towards modern methods of production
remained unchanged with most of his followers. The Arts and Crafts
Movement brought a revival of artistic craftsmanship not of industrial
art. Walter Crane (1845~1915) and C.R.Ashbee (1863-1942) may be
taken as representatives of this, Walter Crane, the most popular of the
disciples of Morris, did not go one step beyond the doctrine of his
master, To him, as to Morris, ‘the true root and basis of all Art lies in
the handicrafts’.*° His aim, therefore, just like Morris’s, was ‘to turn our
artists into craftsmen and our craftsmen into artists’.*! Moreover, he
agreed with Morris in the conviction that ‘genuine and spontaneous
art... is a pleasurable exercise’,** and was led by such premises to a
romantic Socialism identical with that of Morris. The same conflict
which was pointed out in Morris’s doctrine is to be found in Crane, He
too was compelled to admit that ‘cheapness in art and handicraft is well-
nigh impossible’, because ‘cheapness as a rule... can only be obtained
at the cost of the . . . cheapening of human life and labour’.?* Crane’s
attitude towards machine production also corresponds to Morris’s, His
dislike of ‘the monsters of our time clad in plate-glass [and] cast-
iron’*4 — Ruskin had been the first to inveigh against railway stations
and the Crystal Palace - is tempered only by the consideration that
machinery may be necessary and useful as ‘the servant and labour-saver
of man’ for a ‘real saving of labour, heavy and exhausting labour’.*

Ashbee was certainly a more original thinker and more energetic
reformer than Crane.”* Proceeding also from Ruskin and Morris in his
belief that ‘the constructive and decorative arts are the real backbone’
of any artistic culture, that every object ought to be ‘produced under
pleasurable conditions’,** and that therefore art for workaday use cannot
be cheap, he surpasses Morris in that he links up the problems of
workshop-reconstruction and of small-holdings. His Guild and School

of Handicraft, founded in 1888, was removed in 1902 from the East End
of London to Chipping Campden in the Cotswolds. While this aspect of
his work and doctrine is even more ‘medievalist’ than the teaching
of Morris, there is another side to his doctrine which seems genuinely
progressive. At the time of the Guild his attitude towards machine
production was still almost that of Morris and Crane. ‘We do not reject
the machine’, he wrote; ‘we welcome it. But we desire to see it mas-~
tered.’?* Within the next few years, partly perhaps as a consequence of
the hopeless struggle of the Guild against modern methods of manu-
facturing, he broke away from what he now called Ruskin’s and
Morris’s ‘intellectual Ludditism’,?® and the first axiom of his last two
books on art, published after 1910, is that ‘Modern civilization rests on
machinery, and no system for the encouragement or the endowment
of the teaching of the arts can be sound that does not recognize this.’>?

In pronouncing this axiom, Ashbee had abandoned the doctrine of
the Arts and Crafts and adopted one of the basic premises of the
Modern Movement. But with him it was only adopting, and not
creating. His foremost title to fame remains the Campden experiment,
an attempt to revive handicraft and husbandry far from the centres of
modern life. The true pioneers of the Modern Movement are those
who from the outset stood for machine art. As forerunners, of a still
somewhat transitional character, two contemporaries of Morris may be
quoted, Lewis F.Day (1845-1910) and John D.Sedding (1837-91).
Day, a well-known industrial designer of his time, wrote as one who
prefers a life in the real world to dreams of a medieval and idyllic
existence. In discussing the ornament of the future, he said in 1882:
‘Whether we like it or no, machinery and steam-power, and electricity
for all we know, will have something to say concerning the ornament of
the future.’ He said it would be useless to resist this fact, for it was
‘practically settled by the public that they want machine-work. ... We
may protest that they have chosen unwisely, but they will not pay much
heed to us." And Sedding, perhaps the most original church architect
of the late Gothic Revivalist school, who became a pupil of Street just
two years after Morris had left him, gave the same advice in 1892: ‘Let
us not suppose that machinery will be discontinued. Manufacture

cannot be organized upon any other basis. We had better clearly recog-
nize this . . . rather than rebel against the actual and the inevitable.’3*

However, there is still an immense difference between this hesitating
acknowledgement of machinery and the wholehearted welcome which
it received in the writings of the leaders of the next generation. Not one
of them was English: England’s activity in the preparation of the
Modern Movement came to an end immediately after Morris’s death.
The initiative now passed to the Continent and the United States, and,
after a short intermediate period, Germany became the centre of pro-
gress. English writers have not failed to acknowledge this fact;3* but
hardly anybody has tried to explain it. One reason may be this: so long
as the new style had been a matter which in practice concerned only the
wealthier class, England could foot the bill. As soon as the problem
began to embrace the people as a whole, other nations took the lead,
nations that lived no longer, or had never lived, in the atmosphere of
the ancien régime, nations that did not accept or did not know England’s
educational and social contrasts between the privileged classes and
those in the suburbs and the slums,

The new gospel was first preached by poets and writers. Walt
Whitman in his odes and Zola in his novels are carried away by the
overwhelming marvels of modern civilization and modern industry.
The first architects to admire the machine and to understand its essential
character and its consequences in the relation of architecture and design
to ornamentation were two Austrians, two Americans, and a Belgian:
Otto Wagner (1841-1918), Adolf Loos (1870-1933), Louis Sullivan
(1856-1924), Frank Lloyd Wright (1869-1959), and Henri van de
Velde (1863-1957). To these five, one Englishman should be added,
Oscar Wilde (1854-1900), although his occasional praise of machine
beauty may be only one of his many laborious efforts to éparer /e
bourgeois. He said in a lecture of 1882: ‘All machinery may be beautiful,
when it is undecorated even. Do not seek to decorate it. We cannot but
think all good machinery is graceful, also, the line of the strength and
the line of the beauty being one,’**

Van de Velde, Wagner, Loos, and Wright were decisively stimulated
in their thoughts by England. Wright’s manifesto was read at Hull

House in Chicago, a social settlement on the pattern of Toynbee Hall;
Wagner expressed his great admiration of the comfort and cleanness of
English industrial art;°> Loos said explicitly : ‘The centre of European
civilization is at present in London’,®* and his early criticism was to a
large extent passionate support of the exhibitions of modern English
objects arranged by the Osterreichisches Museum in Vienna; and from
van de Velde’s writings the following statement may be quoted: ‘The
seeds that fertilized our spirit, evoked our activities, and originated the
complete renewal of ornamentation and form in the decorative arts,
were undoubtedly the work and the influence of John Ruskin and
William Morris.’”

Only Louis Sullivan, whose Ornament in Architecture is the earliest
of these manifestoes of a new style, seems to have been independent of
England. In his distant Chicago, where metropolitan architecture at
that time meant New York and Boston, and, farther afield, Paris, he
worked out entirely on his own the theory which found its final form in
the Kindergarten Chats of 1901-2.5% In Ornament in Architecture
Sullivan stated already in 1892 that ‘ornament is mentally a luxury, not
a necessary’, and that ‘it would be greatly for our aesthetic good, if we
should refrain entirely from the use of ornament for a period of years,
in order that our thought might concentrate acutely upon the pro-
duction of buildings well formed and comely in the nude’.?*

Whether Sullivan in formulating this thought was expressing directly
the message of his own buildings which will be discussed in Chapter 5,
or whether he was influenced by more articulate critics who in their
turn were influenced by his buildings, is not certain, In any case,
Montgomery Schuyler (1843-1914), writer, journalist, and editor, had
brought out a book called American Architecture in the sare year 1892
and says in it just like Sullivan: ‘If you were to scrape down to the face
of the main wall of the buildings of these streets, you would find that
you had simply removed all the architecture, and that you had left the
buildings as good as ever.’?° Another American architect-writer with
similar convictions was Schuyler’s friend Russell Sturgis (1836-1909)
who wrote in the Architectural Record:*' “All recognized styles are more
or less discredited by the sad misuse which they have undergone at the

hands of our own generation and the preceding one. ... The old styles
simply do not apply to us, and we have to disregard them... . Things
may be better, if architects were allowed to build very plainly for a
while... . If the architects were to fall back upon their building, their
construction, their handling of materials as their sole source of archi-
tectural effect, a new and valuable style might take form.’!*

Such approval of the unadorned surface was not entirely new in
England either. It had already been said by Crane in 1889 that ‘plain
materials and surfaces are infinitely preferable to inorganic or in-
appropriate ornament’,*? and one year after Sullivan, Charles F.
Annesley Voysey wrote that ‘discarding the mass of useless ornaments’
would be healthy and desirable.** But just as Voysey, in spite of such
suggestions, has been one of the most important representatives of the
evolution of ornament between Morris and the twentieth century, so
Sullivan was in fact just as much a revolutionary in his ornament as in
his use of plain, smooth surfaces. In his same paper of 1892, he stated
that ‘organic ornament’ should be the stage to follow the purge of all
ornament which had to come first.

Sullivan’s own decorative motifs belong to the species known as Art
Nouveau. So do those of van de Velde who, in his lectures between
1893 and 1900,"° pronounced — independently without doubt - the
same faith in a type of ornament which would be able to express sym-
bolically ‘by means of pure structure . . . joy, lassitude, protection,
etc,’,*6 and in the machine as a stimulus to the achievement of a new
beauty. Van de Velde showed his audience that a great deal of the
English Arts and Crafts had remained a pastime of highly sensitive
artists for highly sensitive connoisseurs, and therefore was not much
healthier than the exquisite and decadent writing of Huysmans. He
contrasted Morris’s art, which never broke away from reminiscences of
the Gothic centuries, with his own new doctrine of the beauty inherent
in machines, ‘The powerful play of their iron arms’, he exclaimed,
‘will create beauty, as soon as beauty guides them.’*? This statement
dates from about 1894. Six years later van de Velde added more
explicitly: ‘Why should artists who build palaces in stone rank any
higher than artists who build them in metal?’'* ‘The engineers stand

at the entrance to the riew style.’** Engineers are ‘the architects of the
present day’.54 What we need is ‘a logical structure of products, un-
compromising logic in the use of materials, proud and frank exhibition
of working processes’.*! A great future is prophesied for iron, steel,
aluminium, linoleum, celluloid, cement.>? As to the appearance of
objects in the house, van de Velde pleads for ‘that lost sense of vivid,
strong, clear colours, vigorous and strong forms, and reasonable con-
struction’,* and praises the new English furniture for its ‘systematic
discarding of ornament’.54

Precisely this was to be Adolf Loos’s gospel. He had been trained as
an architect, first in Dresden and then in the United States. Coming
back to Vienna in 1896, he was shown a small newly published book by
Vienna’s most progressive architect, Otto Wagner.** The book was
based on Wagner’s Inaugural Lecture at the Art Academy, in 1894,
and its doctrine was in many respects similar to van de Velde’s. ‘The
only possible departure for artistic creation is modern life.’*” ‘All modern
forms must be in harmony with. . . the new requirements of our time.”5*
‘Nothing that is not practical can be beautiful.’** So Wagner foresaw a
‘coming Naissance’*” and, what is more astonishing, pointed out as
some of the characteristics of that future style ‘horizontal lines such as
were prevalent in Antiquity, table-like roofs, great simplicity and an
energetic exhibition of construction and materials’.6! Needless to say,
he too was passionately in favour of iron.

Adolf Loos wrote his first essays for newspapers and periodicals in
1897 and 1898.° Attacking the Viennese Art Nouveau style, known as
the style of the Sezession, which was just then at its height, he pointed
out: ‘The lower the standard of a people, the more lavish are its orna-
ments. To find beauty in form instead of making it depend on ornament
is the goal towards which humanity is aspiring.’** For pure beauty in
an individual work of art is to Loos ‘the degree to which it attains
utility and the harmony of all parts in relation to each other’.6* The
engineers he regards therefore as ‘our Hellenes. From them we receive
our culture,’ And he is consistent enough to call the plumber (the
term being used in the general American sense) ‘the quartermaster of
culture, i.e. of the kind of culture which is decisive today’.

Only a few years later similar views were expressed with equally
strong conviction, though in a more comprehensive and sweeping style,
by Sullivan’s greatest pupil, Frank Lloyd Wright, who in rgo1 read a
manifesto on The Art and Craft of the Machine.” It begins straight away
with a panegyric on our ‘age of steel and steam . . . the Machine Age,
wherein locomotive engines, engines of industry, engines of light or
engines of war or steamships take the place works of Art took in previous
history’.68 Wright enthusiastically admires the new ‘simplified and
etherealized’ rhythm of future buildings, where ~ an amazing pro-
phecy — ‘space is more spacious, and the sense of it may enter into every
building, great or small’.*® In such an age the painter or the poet does
not count for much. ‘Today, we have a Scientist or an Inventor in the
place of a Shakespeare or a Dante.’”?

But if Wright speaks of today, he means the twentieth century as it
could be and ought to be, and not as it appeared in r90r1. The many
disgraceful things perpetrated by machines are, according to Wright,
the fault not of the machine but of the designers. For ‘the machine has
noble possibilities, unwillingly forced to this degradation . . . by the
Arts themselves’.?7! Hence one can be in no doubt as to the victory in
the battle between the artist, in the old sense, and the machine. The
machine is a ‘relentless force’ bound to discomfit the ‘handicraftsmen
and parasitic artists’.’? It sounds like a deliberate challenge to Morris’s
‘Art will die out of civilization, if the system lasts. That in itself does
to me carry with it the condemnation of the whole system’, when
Frank Lloyd Wright, looking at Chicago’s overwhelming silhouette and
lights by night, exclaims: ‘If this power must be uprooted that civiliza~
tion may live, then civilization is already doomed.’"? And Wright’s
belief in the machine is so strong that he foresees a possible salvation
for the craftsman in his humbly learning from the machine. ‘Rightly
used,’ he says, ‘the very curse machinery puts upon handicraft should
emancipate the artists from temptation to petty structural deceit and
end this wearisome struggle to make things seem what they are not and
never can be.’’*

So Wright’s position in 1901 was almost identical with that of the
most advanced thinkers on the future of art and architecture today.

However, this theory remained isolated in America for a long time.
And it is an indisputable fact that, in most European countries as well,
those who pleaded for a new style of the century found very little re-
sponse before the First World War. This was for instance the case with
Anatole de Baudot, Viollet-le-Duc’s pupil, who, as early as 1889, said:
‘A long time ago the influence of the architect declined and the engineer,
homme moderne par excellence, is beginning to replace him’,”* and it
was also the case with H.P.Berlage (1856-1934) in Holland who, in
two articles in 1895 and 1896, recommended to the architect not to
think in terms of style while designing buildings. Only thus, he said,
can real architecture comparable to that of the Middle Ages be created,
architecture as a ‘pure art of utility’.“© Such architecture he visualized
as ‘the art of the twentieth century’, and it should be noted that the
century to him was to be one of Socialism.”?

To have achieved a wide movement promoting these new ideas is
undeniably the merit of German architects and writers. The movement
which they fostered proved strong enough to yield a universal style of
thinking and building, and not merely some revolutionary sayings and
deeds of a few individuals.

The man who acted as a connecting link between the English style
of the nineties and Germany was Hermann Muthesius (1861-1927)
who, from 1896 till 1903, was attached to the German Embassy in
London for research on English housing. Since Art Nouveau had hardly
diverted English domestic architecture from the sound and slow course
of its evolution, Muthesius came back a convinced supporter of reason
and simplicity in building and art. Soon he became the acknowledged
leader of a new tendency towards Sachlichkeit, which followed the
short blossom-time of Art Nouveau in Germany. The untranslatable
word sachlich, meaning at the same time pertinent, matter-of-fact, and
objective, became the catchword of the growing Modern Movement.7®
‘Reasonable Sachlichkeit’ is what Muthesius praiscs in English archi-
tecture and crafts,*® ‘perfect and pure utility’ is what he demands from
the modern artist. And since today only machine-made objects are
‘produced according to the economic nature of the age’, they alone can
be taken into consideration where the problem is the creation of a new

style, a Maschinenstil.°° If we want to see existing manifestations of this
new style, we are once more invited to look at ‘railway stations, exhibi-
tion halls, bridges, steamships, etc. Here we are faced with a severe and
almost scientific Sachlichkeit, with abstinence from all outward decora-
tion, and with shapes completely dictated by the purposes which they
are meant to serve.’ Hence future progress can be imagined only in the
direction of strict Sachlichkeit and a discarding of all merely ‘tacked-on’
decoration. Building’ or objects for use that are created on such lines
will display ‘a neat elegance which arises from suitability and . . .
conciseness’.*!

By pronouncing such ideas, still unfamiliar in Germany, Muthesius
soon became the centre of a group of congenial spirits. Of paramount
importance, owing to the echo which he found among the bourgeoisie
listening to his lectures and reading his pamphlets, was Alfred Lichtwark
(1852-1914), art historian and director of the Hamburg Gallery. He
was a teacher by nature, obsessed with the purest passion for education.
The rapid development of art education in the widest sense of the word,
which has taken place in the German elementary schools and secondary
schools since the beginning of the new century, is largely due to
Lichtwark’s efforts. His campaign in favour of Sachlichkeit started even
earlier than Muthesius’s. In the lectures which he delivered between
1896 and 1899, and which are full of praise for England, he pleaded for
practical, unadorned furniture in ‘smooth, polished, light forms’ con-
venient to housewives, for sachliche Schénheit, for wide horizontal
windows and ‘floods of light’, and for fresh flowers in the rooms.*?
The campaign thus started was soon taken up by others and diverted
into different channels without losing its zest for simplicity and honesty.
The architect Paul Schultze-Naumburg (1869-1949) began in 1901 to
publish his Kudturarbeiten, a series of books starting with one on the
building of houses. In 1903 Ferdinand Avenarius (1856-1923) founded
the Direrbund, and in 1904 the Heimatschutz was created, an associa-
tion corresponding roughly to our Society for the Protection of
Rural England, that is, a preservationist, backward-looking, not a
propagandist, forward-looking body, closer indeed to the ideals of
Morris than to those of Muthesius. Muthesius on the other hand was

supported by several Germans individually whom one would not
expect to find in his camp, for instance to quote only three, by Hermann
Obrist, one of the most original artists of the German Art Nouveau, by
Wilhelm Schafer, a well-known writer and poet, and by Friedrich
Naumann, a politician of importance in the development of social re-
forms and democracy in pre- and post-First-World-War Germany.
Obrist wrote in 1903 of steamers and ‘the beauty in the powerful sweep
of their colossal yet quiet contours .. . their wonderful utility, their
neatness, smoothness, and shine’. A look into the engine-room makes
him feel ‘almost intoxicated’.*? Wilhelm Schafer vividly recommends
the sachliche Ausbildung of all forms; this would necessarily lead to a
modern style for all products, just as it has done in machines and iron
bridges.*! As to Friedrich Naumann, his main interest was in the social
aspects of architecture and art. This led him to an early appreciation of
the machine. Exactly like Muthesius, and no doubt inspired by him,
Naumann speaks of ‘ships, bridges, gasometers, railway stations, market
halls’ as ‘our new buildings’. He calis ‘building in iron the greatest
artistic experience of our time’, because ‘here there is not the application
of art to construction, no stuck-on decoration, no frills. Here is creation
for use... here are as yet inexpressible possibilities. All our notions of
space, of weight and support are changed.’**

Naumann was a personal friend of Karl Schmidt (1873-1948) who,
as a trained cabinetmaker, had started a furniture workshop at Dresden
in 1898."° In this shop he employed from the beginning modern archi-
tects and artists as designers. Though Schmidt started under the
influence of the English Arts and Crafts (he had travelled in England
as a journeyman), his main interest soon became inexpensiveness and
production by machinery. As early as 1899-1900 the Deutsche Werk-
statten, in an exhibition of industrial art in Dresden, showed an apart-
ment of two living-rooms, bedroom, and kitchen for a mere £40. And
in 1905-6, for another exhibition, again in Dresden, they produced their
first machine-made furniture, designed by Richard Riemerschmid
(1868-1957), Schmidt’s brother-in-law.*’ In their catalogue of the same
year they prided themselves on ‘developing the style of furniture from
the spirit of the machine’. This was a feat far more revolutionary than

it seems to us today. At that time there were hardly any instances outside
Germany of outstanding artists or architects working not for deco-
rative art, but for industrial design, with the exception perhaps of
printing in England which just then took the step from the seclu-
sion of such a private venture as the Doves Press into the market for
the common man. The important date is 1912, the year of the
introduction, thanks to J.H.Mason, of the Imprint type into the
founts of the Monotype Corporation. The Deutsche Werkstitten
soon turned to another, even more topical, problem: the standardization
of parts. Their first ‘Unit’ furniture, to call it by the name which
has become usual in England, was shown in 1910 as Typenmdbel. The
idea came from America, where it had been in use for some time for
bookcases.®8

The most important step towards the establishment of a universally
recognized style out of individual experiments was the foundation of
the Deutscher Werkbund. In 1907, Muthesius, then Superintendent
of the Prussian Board of Trade for Schools of Arts and Crafts, had
delivered a public lecture in which, in a very outspoken manner, he
warned German crafts and industries against continuing with the
imitation of the hackneyed forms of bygone times. The speech roused
a storm of indignation with the trades’ associations. Discussions be-
came more and more excited and, before the end of the year 1907, a
number of adventurous manufacturers together with some architects,
artists, and writers, had made up their minds to found a new association,
called Werkbund, with the aim of ‘selecting the best representatives of
art, industry, crafts, and trades, of combining all efforts towards high
quality in industrial work, and of forming a rallying-point for all those
who are able and willing to work for high quality’.*® Qualiraz, the
central idea of the group, was defined as meaning ‘not only excellent
durable work and the use of flawless, genuine materials, but also the
attainment of an organic whole rendered sachlich, noble, and, if you
will, artistic by such means’.°° This definition shows clearly that the
Werkbund was, from the outset, not opposed to machine production in
any respect. In the Inaugural Address at the first Annual Meeting, the
architect Theodor Fischer said: ‘There is no fixed boundary line

between tool and machine, Work of a high standard can be created with
tools or with machines as soon as man has mastered the machine and
made it a tool... . It is not the machines in themselves that make work
inferior, but our inability to use them properly.’ And equally it is ‘not
mass production and subdivision of labour that is fatal, but the fact
that industry has lost sight of its aim of producing work of the highest
quality and does not feel itself to be a serving member of our community
but the ruler of the age’.®!

When, in 1915, the Design and Industries Association was founded
in England, avowedly inspired by the example of the Deutscher Werk-
bund, it declared in one of its first publications that it was ‘accepting
the machine in its proper place, as a device to be guided and controlled,
not merely boycotted’.** England, with the foundation of the D.1.A.,
was not early in taking up the programme developed by the Werkbund.
Other Continental countries had followed Germany before the war: the
Austrian Werkbund dates from 1910, the Swiss from 1913; and the
Swedish Slojdsforening was gradually reshaped into a Werkbund be-
tween I910 and r917.

In Germany itself, the existence of this enterprising and uncom-
promising body did a very great deal to spread the ideals of the Modern
Movement. But the Werkbund was not the only centre. Surprisingly
quickly, German art schools had deserted the routine of the nineteenth
century and adopted the new course. New principals and new teachers
were appointed everywhere. In Prussia, Muthesius was responsible for
this. He called Peter Behrens to Diisseldorf and Poelzig to Breslau, both
as heads of the existing Academies of Art. Even before that time Josef
Hoffmann had become Professor of Architecture in the Viennese School
of Arts and Crafts, and van de Velde head of the Weimar Art School.
In 1907, the Berlin School of Arts and Crafts also secured a progressive
principal in the person of Bruno Paul.

However, progressive as the spirit in these schools and the Werkbund
was, the most essential problem was still unsettled, the very problem
with which this chapter is mainly concerned. Though machine art was
now accepted as one means of artistic expression besides handicraft,
where should the stress lie in the future? This problem was for the first

time clearly put and explicitly discussed at the Annual Meeting of the
Werkbund in Cologne in 1914. Muthesius stood up for standardization
(Typisierung), van de Velde for individualism, Muthesius said: ‘Archi-
tecture and the entire sphere of activity of the Werkbund tend towards
standardization. It is only by standardization that they can recover that
universal importance which they possessed in ages of harmonious
civilization. Only by standardization . . . as a salutary concentration of
forces, can a generally accepted and reliable taste be introduced.’ Van
de Velde responded: ‘As long as there are artists in the Werkbund...
they will protest against any proposed canon and any standardization.
The artist is essentially and intimately a passionate individualist, a
spontaneous creator. Never will he, of his own free will, submit to
a discipline forcing upon him a norm, a canon,”"!

The first ever to plead the cause of the machine and the new architec-
ture of a machine age with the same fervour with which van de Velde
had pleaded that of individualism were the Italian Futurists and especi-
ally the brilliant young architect Antonio Sant’Elia (1888-1917) who
died without having had a chance of building as he thought, preached,
and drew.® Sant’Elia’s Messaggio is a vision of the casa nuova, ‘con-
structed with loving care for all the resources of science and technics
and determined in its new forms, new lines, its new raison d’étre, solely
by the special conditions of modern life... . The calculations of the
insistence of materials, the use of reinforced concrete and iron exclude
architecture in the traditional sense.’ Buildings look grotesque if they
try to obtain within the possibilities of the slenderness and thinness of
concrete the heavy curves of arches and the massive character of marble.
The job of today is not to build cathedrals but big hotels, railway
stations, arterial roads, market halls, towers on grid plans in replacement
of slums. ‘We must build the modern city ex novo’... , a town of
‘tumultuous streets’ with building below as well as above ground. The
house must be beautified not on the small scale of mouldings and capitals
but in the grouping of its masses and the arrangement of its plan, It
must be ‘similar to a gigantic machine’, made ‘of concrete, of glass, of
iron, without painting or sculpture’, lifts ought to be exposed outside,
cold calculation and the boldest audacity must unite forces, and the

result will not be ‘an arid combination of the practical and the useful,
but remains art, that is expression’.

This message appeared in the catalogue of an exhibition called Nuove
Tendenze in Milan in May 1914. Two months later Marinetti, the
vociferous leader of the Futurists made it the centre of a Manifesto of
Modern Architecture issued in July 1914. He added passages with
which Sant’Elia did not agrec, but it remains highly probable that
Marinetti’s original Futurist Manifesto of 1909 with its profession of
faith in motor-cars (‘we laid our hands on their burning breasts’) and
in ‘the great crowd, the modern metropolis, arsenals and shipyards at
night, railways, steamers, aeroplanes’ had inspired Sant’Elia’s thought
on the City of the Future,*® and indeed those remarkable visions of
buildings to which we have to revert in Chapter 7.

These visions of about 1913-14 appear fantastical when set side by
side with the Sachlichkett of the work of those German architects who
agreed with Muthesius, and especially Peter Behrens and Walter
Gropius, What they built in 1909-14 will be illustrated at the end of
this book, whose chief aim is in fact to prove that the new style, the
genuine and legitimate style of our century, was achieved by 1914.
Morris had started the movement by reviving handicraft as an art
worthy of the best men’s efforts, the pioneers about 1900 had gone
further by discovering the immense, untried possibilities of machine
art. The synthesis, in creation as well as in theory, is the work of Walter
Gropius (born in 1883). In 1909, Gropius worked out a memorandum
on standardization and mass production of small houses, and on advis-
able ways of financing such building schemes.*? At the end of 1914, he
began preparing his plans for the reorganization of the Weimar Art
School, of which he had’ been elected principal by the Grand Duke of
Saxe-Weimar.*® The opening of the new school, combining an academy
of art and a school of arts and crafts, took place in 1919. Its name was
Staatliches Bauhaus, and it was to become, for more than a decade, a
paramount centre of creative energy in Europe. It was at the same time
a Jaboratory for handicraft and for standardization; a school and a
workshop. It comprised, in an admirable community spirit, architects,
master craftsmen, abstract painters, all working for a new spirit in

building. Building to Gropius is a term of wide import. All art, as long
as it is sound and healthy, serves building.*® Hence all students of the
Bauhaus were trained as apprentices, received at the end of their course
the freedom of the trade, and were only after that admitted to the
building-site and the studio of experimental design.'"

Gropius regards himself as a follower of Ruskin and Morris, of van
de Velde and of the Werkbund.'"' So our circle is complete. The history
of artistic. theory between 1890 and the First World War proves the
assertion on which the present work is based, namely, that the phase
between Morris and Gropius is an historical unit. Morris laid the
foundation of the modern style; with Gropius its character was ulti-
mately determined. Art historians speak of ‘Transitional’ preceding
the harmonious perfection of ‘Early Gothic’. While Romanesque
architecture was still lingering on all over France, the master of the east
chapels and the ambulatory of St Denis designed in a completely new
style, as the pioneer of that style which was to spread over the next sixty
or eighty years. What he did for France before the middle of the twelfth
century was done for the world at the beginning of this century by
Morris and his followers — Voysey, van de Velde, Mackintosh, Wright,
Loos, Behrens, Gropius, and the other architects and artists in recog-
nition of whose work the following pages are written.

2- From Eighteen-fifty-one to Morris and
the Arts and Crafts

A STODGY and complacent optimism was the frame of mind prevailing
in England about 1850. Here was England, thanks to the enterprise of
manufacturers and merchants, wealthier than ever, the workshop of
the world and the paradise of a successful bourgeoisie, governed by a
bourgeois queen and an efficient prince consort. Charity, churchgoing,
and demonstrative morality might serve to settle your accounts with
Heaven and your conscience ~ on the whole you were lucky to live in
this most progressive and practical age.

No generation before this could have conceived the idea of an
exhibition of raw materials and technical products from nations all over
the world. The scheme, as it was carried to its glorious realization in
1851, was largely due to Prince Albert’s energy.! In mapping it out and
arranging it, he was carried on the same wave of expansive optimism as
his contemporaries.

‘Nobody who has paid any attention to the particular features of the
present era’, said Albert in one of the preparatory addresses, ‘will doubt
for a moment that we are living in a period of most wonderful transition,
which tends rapidly to the accomplishment of that great end to which
indeed all history points, the realization of the unity of mankind,’ In
the same speech he extolled ‘the great principle of division of labour,
which may be called the moving power of civilization’,? and the intro-
duction to the Official Catalogue of the Exhibition asserts that ‘an
event like this exhibition could not have taken place at any other period,
and perhaps not among any other people than ourselves’. Indeed not;
those who wrote these lines knew the reasons and spoke quite frankly
about them: ‘the perfect security for property’ and ‘commercial

1. Carpet from the Great Exhibition of 1851.

freedom’.? The thousands of visitors who thronged the Exhibition
probably felt the same. The attendance as well as the size of the build-
ings and the quantity of products shown was colossal. The aesthetic
quality of the products was abominable, Sensible visitors realized that,
and soon discussions started in England and other countries as to the
reasons for such an evident failure. It is easy for us, today, to enumerate
various such reasons; but it was hard indeed for a generation that had
grown up amid unprecedented discoveries in science and technique.
There were the new railways and power-looms, there were the most
cunning inventions to facilitate the production of almost any object,
formerly made so laboriously by craftsmen - why should these wonder-
ful improvements not help to improve art as well?

Yet this is what resulted: Pardoc, Hoomans & Pardoe’s patent velvet
pile tapestry carpeting (PI.1), wrong from any point of view. You see
an extremely elaborate pattern, the charm of which, during the Rococo
period, would have been based on the craftsman’s imagination and un-
failing skill, It is now done by machine, and it looks it. Eighteenth-
century ornament may have influenced the designer, the coarseness and

2. Shaw! from the Great
Exhibition of 1851.

overcrowding are his original addition. Moreover, he had neglected all
fundamental requirements of decoration in general and of carpet
decoration especially ; we are forced to step over bulging scrolls and into
large, unpleasantly realistic flowers; it seems unbelievable that the
teachings of Persian carpets should have been so completely forgotten.
And this barbarism was by no means limited to England. The other
nations exhibiting were equally rich in atrocities. Take the design for a
silk shawl by E. Hartneck, shown in the French section (Pl.2). This is
at least as incongruous as the English carpet in its mixture of stylization
and realism. It shows the same ignorance of that basic need in creating
patterns, the integrity of the surface; and the same vulgarity in detail.
It was not only that the machine had stamped out taste in industrial
products; by 1850 it seems that it had irremediably poisoned the sur-
viving craftsmen. This is what makes us feel particularly indignant
about silverware such as the hand-made decanters, goblets, and jugs in
Plate 3. Why could no craftsman during the eighteenth century produce
anything so bulging, so overdone? Surely this contrast is real and not

3. Silverware from the Great Exhibition of 1851.

simply a figment of our generation. The insensibility of the artist to-
wards the beauty of pure shape, pure material, pure decorative pattern,
is monstrous.

Once more the question has to be asked: Why was this bound to
come? The usual answer — because of industrial growth and the inven-
tion of machines - is correct, but as a rule taken too superficially. The
potter’s wheel is a machine, and so are the hand-loom and the printer’s
press. The development from such simple mechanical devices to
modern wonders of machinery was logical and gradual. Why did the
machine in the end become so disastrous to art? The transition from
the medieval to the modern state of applied art was reached somewhere
about the end of the eighteenth century. After 1760, a sudden accelera-
tion in technical improvements set in. This no doubt was due to that
profound change of mind which began with the Reformation, gathered
strength during the seventeenth century, and was dominant in the
eighteenth. Rationalism, inductive philosophy, experimental science,
were the determining fields of European activity during the Age of

Reason, Even the religious revival which took place has a strong
element of rationalism and marked understanding for worldly tasks and
the ethical qualities of workaday life.

The change in European thought was accompanied and followed by
a change in social ideals. Thus the newly-roused inventiveness received
an equally new practical scope. Applied science'as a means of governing
the world soon became part of a programme directed against those
classes which had governed during the Middle Ages. Industry meant
the bourgeoisie as opposed to the Church and the Nobility. The French
Revolution accomplished what had been slowly preparing for more
than two centuries. The medieval social system was swept out of
existence, and with it the class of cultured and leisurely patrons as well
as the class of cultured and guild-trained craftsmen. It is more than
coincidence that very soon after the dissolution of the guilds in France
(1791), the Ecole Polytechnique and the Conservatoire des Arts et des
Métiers were founded (1795 and 1798), and the first National Industrial
Exhibition was held (1798). Industry instead of handicraft is a con-
ception of the ters état. This applies likewise to England; but, owing
to the temperament of the English, the change was slower here and
came about without a sudden revolution. It started early in the eight-
eenth century and ended only with the Reform Bill in 1832. Guilds had
never been so influential in England as on the Continent. From the
fourteenth century on, the nobility had already begun to merge with the
merchant class. Plutocracy began to replace aristocracy earlier in
England than in France, It is only in a figurative sense that the history
of English civilization between 1760 and 1830 can be called the
Industrial Revolution,

Some dates may illustrate the rapid and impetuous industrial growth
which formed a world capable, a century later, of creating the Modern
Movement. As England was leading in the Industrial Revolution nearly
all these early dates are English. In 1709, Abraham Darby made cast
iron with coke (instead of wood); about 1740 Benjamin Huntsman in-
vented the crucible process of melting steel; in 1783 Cort introduced
the puddling process; about 1810 the decisive improvements in the use
of the blast-furnace took place (Aubertot); in 1839 Nasmyth invented

the steam-hammer; and in 1856 Bessemer his new method of producing
steel free from carbon. To these innovations in metallurgy, we must
add the invention of the steam-engine with separate condenser (J. Watt,
1765), of the steam-boiler (1781), the screw steamer (1821), and the
railway engine (1825). The principal dates in the spinning and weaving
industries are the following: 1733 fly-shuttle (J. Kay), 1760 shuttle drop
box (R. Kay), 1764-7 spinning jenny (Hargreaves), 1769-75 water-
frame for spinning (Arkwright), 1774-9 spinning mule (Crompton),
1785 power-loom (Cartwright), 1799 Jacquard loom.

The immediate consequence of this precipitous development was a
sudden increase in production, demanding more and more hands, and
so leading to an equally fast increase in population. Towns grew up
with horrifying rapidity, new markets had to be satisfied, an ever bigger
production was demanded, and inventiveness was stimulated anew.
A few more figures may illustrate this rank growth which made our
modern world out of a world less similar to ours than to that of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The production of iron in England
amounted to about 17,coo tons in 1740, 68,000 in 1788, 170,000 in
1802, 678,000 in 1830. The production of coal in 1810 was 6,000,000
tons, in 1830 25,000,000, in 1857 115,000,000, The export of cotton in
1701 was valued at £23,500, in 1764 at £200,000, in 1790 at £1,500,000,
in 1833 at £18,000,000, in 1840 at £26,500,000. The English population
grew before 1750 by about 3°;, per decade, between 1751 and 1781 by
6°, per decade, 1781-91 9°), 1791-1801 11°, T8OI-11 14°, 1811-21
18°, Manchester had 8000 inhabitants in 1720, 41,000 in 1744,
102,000 in 1801, 353,000 in 1841; Birmingham, 15.000 in 1700, 73,000
1801, 183,000 in 1841.

In the midst of this breathless race, no time was left to refine all those
innumerable innovations which swamped producer and consumer,
With the extinction of the medieval craftsman, the shape and appear-
ance of all products were left to the uneducated manufacturer. Designers
of some standing had not penetrated into industry, artists kept aloof,
and the workman had no say in artistic matters. Work was bleaker than
ever before in European history. Working hours were between twelve
and fourteen, doors and windows in factories were kept locked. Children

were employed from their fifth or sixth year on. Their hours of work
were reduced in 1802, after long struggles, to twelve hours a day. In
1833, 61,000 men, 65,000 women, and 84,000 children under eighteen
years of age worked in cotton mills. In mines, no inquiries into accidents
were held before 1814.

Economists and philosophers were blind enough to provide an
ideological foundation for the criminal attitude of the employer. Philo-
sophy taught that unthwarted development of everybody’s energy was
the only natural and healthy way of progress.* Liberalism ruled un-
checked in philosophy as in industry, and implied complete freedom
for the manufacturer to produce anything shoddy and hideous, if he
could get away with it, And he easily could, because the consumer had
no tradition, no education, and no leisure, and was, like the producer,
a victim of this vicious circle.

All these facts and considerations have to be taken into account if we
are to understand the exhibits of 1851. They were indeed taken into
account by the very organizers of the exhibition which, in the eyes of
this group of energetic men, was, on the aesthetic side, to be an attempt
at reform. These men were Henry Cole (1808-82), civil servant and
reformer by constitution, his architect friends Owen Jones (1809-74)
and Matthew Digby Wyatt (1820-77), and his painter friend Richard
Redgrave (1804-88). Cole began in 1847 to issue what he called art
manufactures, i.e. things of everyday use, better designed, he thought,
than was current at the time, and two years later he started a magazine
called the Journal of Design and Manufactures. This journal developed
a programme of remarkably sound aesthetics.’ ‘Ornament .. . must be
secondary to the thing decorated’, there must be ‘fitness in the ornament
to the thing ornamented’, wallpapers and carpets must have no patterns
‘suggestive of anything but a level or plain’, and so on. Certain designs
by Owen Jones illustrate these principles to perfection although Cole’s
own and those made by his friends for his short-lived firm do not. The
commentary in the Journal of Design to Owen Jones’s chintz here
illustrated (Pl. 4) runs as follows: ‘The design is, as it ought to be, of a
perfectly flat unshadowed character. Secondly, the quantities and lines
are equally distributed, so as to produce at a distance the appearance of

4. Owen Jones: Pattern design,
from the Journal of Design
and Manufactures, 1852.

levelness. Thirdly, the colours [they are black and dark purple on white}
produce a neutral tint. And lastly . . . it is quite unobtrusive, which a
covering of handsomer stuffs [the material was presumably for loose
covers of chairs] ought to be. The lines and forms are graceful too,
when examined closely.”

The principles put forward in such a commentary and throughout
the writings, occasional or permanent, of the Cole circle were based - as
they all freely admitted ~ on the tenets formulated a few years before
by Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin, to whom reference has already
been made as an inspirer of Ruskin’s theory of honesty in architecture
and design. Pugin had started his True Principles with ‘the two great
rules for design .. . that there should be no features about a building
which are not necessary for convenience, construction, or propriety’,
and ‘that all ornament should consist of enrichment of the essential
construction of the building’, yet the title of the book is The True
Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture, and Pugin was indeed
unable to isolate his principles from the use which, in his view, Gothic
builders had made of them. So he remained firmly within a faithful

5. Pugin: Ornamental design,
from Foliated Ornament,
1849.

imitation of the past, even if some of his own ornamented patterns
herald and certainly surpass the designs of Owen Jones and even herald
those of William Morris (Pl. 5).

What raises Morris as a reformer of design high above the Cole
circle and Pugin is not only that he had the true designer’s genius and
they had not, but also that he recognized the indissoluble unity of an
age and its social system, which they had not done. Cole, Jones, and
Wyatt had accepted production by machine unquestioningly, they had
not seen that it posed any unprecedented problems and so had simply
attempted to improve design without ever pioneering to its roots.
Pugin’s panacea was Catholic faith and Gothic forms. He thundered
against ‘those inexhaustible mines of bad taste, Birmingham and
Sheffield’, against ‘Sheffield Eternal’ and ‘Brummagem Gothic’ and
succeeded in getting better work by employing ‘a devout and skilful
goldsmith of Birmingham’- in fact Hardman, a manufacturer - and by
supervising him closely, That alone clearly could not be enough, nor
could Cole’s attempts at a reform in the teaching principles of art schools
be enough.

Morris alone felt that what was needed was the personal example, the
artist turning craftsman-designer himself. While he followed his inborn
passion for making things with his own hands, he knew also that to do
this instead of painting pictures was his social duty. Before he was
twenty-two, he had experimented with carving in stone and wood,
moulding in clay, and illuminating. This helped him to acquire a respect
for the nature of materials and working processes. Wherever he looked
in contemporary industrial art, he saw manufacturers blatantly violating
this. So his first furniture for his own rooms was nothing but a protest.
The chairs and tables, ‘intensely medieval, like incubi and succubi’
(Rossetti), tell of a deliberate return to the most primitive attitude in
shaping domestic objects.

At the time, and also in the years when Red House was furnished
and the firm founded, Morris’s mode of expression was still somewhat
different from that of his later, more famous, and more established years.
His early designs are crisper, lighter, and more daintily stylized, under
some influence no doubt from the teachings of Cole’s Journal and of
Owen Jones whose Grammar of Ornament he possessed. In the Daisy,
the second of any wallpapers he designed, 1861 (P1.6), the colours are
light though restrained, the pattern is pleasantly balanced, without
recession, and wholly ornamental without ever losing that intense feel-
ing for nature which is so characteristic of Morris and so different from
the imitation of nature as the designers of the Exhibition practised it.

Later on, Morris’s style becomes broader and statelier and thereby
loses some of its youthful and adventurous charm.* Not that his creative
vein was less abundant now, His very simplicity of approach led him to
forms more traditional. When, for example, in 1878, he decided to make
carpets, he saw that certain Oriental patterns were almost exactly what
he wanted. Hence his Hammersmith carpets (P1.7) are very much like
Oriental designs, though he emphasized that he wanted them ‘obviously
to be the outcome of modern and Western ideas’.? This is remarkable.
Morris was so far from inventing decorative forms for invention’s sake,
that if he found models however remote in space or time which met his
purpose, he made use of them or at least came under their spell, even
if this happened against his own will.

Herein lies the explanation of the dependence of most of Morris’s
later chintzes and wallpapers on models of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, We are inclined today to over-rate the importance of this,
It is sufficient to compare one of his most famous chintzes, the Honey-
suckle of 1883 (PI. 8), with a specimen of pre-Morris design in textiles
such as the shawl from the Great Exhibition (PI. 2), in order to recognize
at once the fundamental novelty of Morris’s designs. The contrast
between the two is not only one between inspiration and imitation;
between valuable imitation inspired by fifteenth-century delicacy, and
bad imitation vulgarizing eighteenth-century licence; it is more.
Morris’s design is clear and sober, the shawl of 1851 is a messy entwine-
ment of motifs. Its thoughtless concoction of stylization and realism is
opposed to Morris’s logical unity of composition and close study of
growth in nature. The designer of the shawl neglects the decorative law
of the coherence of surfaces, while Morris without any loss of vitality
spreads out a flat pattern.

We get exactly the same result if we place Morris’s carpet side by
side with the carpet of the Exhibition. Again we find live understanding
of decorative requirements as opposed to utter neglect of them, and
again simplicity and economy as opposed to wasteful confusion, And
although it must certainly be admitted that in stained glass designed
by Morris’s firm there is more detail-realism than we would now approve
of for ornamental purposes, it must not be forgotten that when Morris
began, stained-glass windows were just illustrations with plenty of
figures, buildings, and spatial recession, and with a large quantity of
colours and shades. His is the merit of having gone back to simple
figures, simple attitudes, simple colours, ornamental backgrounds. His
Pre-Raphaelite friends and masters helped him in that. Their style in
painting differed in the same way from mid-Victorian genre-painting
as his from the style of 1851. And if Morris windows do not go further
in decorative economy, that is due less to Morris than to Burne-Jones,
who could not help remaining a painter, whereas Morris wanted him
to be nothing but a decorator.}°

The revival of decorative honesty in Morris’s designs counts for
more in the history of the Modern Movement than their connexion

g. Dresser: Cruet set and tea-kettle, 1877-8.

with bygone styles. Morris the artist may in the end not have been able
to reach beyond the limitations of his century; Morris the man and
thinker did. This is the reason why his writings and lectures had to be
discussed in this book before his artistic achievements.
’ The first effect of Morris’s teaching was that several young artists,
architects, and amateurs decided to devote their lives to the crafts, What
had been an inferior occupation for more than half a century, became
once more a recognized task, There is no need to enumerate them all.
Crane and Ashbee have already been mentioned. De Morgan was the
great English potter of his age; in glass Powell was foremost; in metal-
work Benson; in the arts of the book, Emery Walker and Cobden-
Sanderson, the founders of the Doves Press. It is extremely significant
that between 1880 and 1890 five societies for the promotion of artistic
craftsmanship were started: in 1882 Arthur H. Mackmurdo’s Century
Guild (the term ‘Guild’ should be noticed), in 1884 the Art Workers’
Guild, in the same year the Home Arts and Industries Association,
particularly interested in rural crafts, in 1888 Ashbee’s Guild and School
of Handicraft, and also in 1888 the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society.
Most of the members of these guilds and associations were a generation
younger than Morris, but not all. De Morgan, for instance, was born in

1839, L.F, Day in 1845, Arthur H. Mackmurdo in 1851. The work of
these artists, if re-examined today, has remarkable surprises in store.
Take for instance a cruet set and a tea-kettle (Pl.9), produced in 1877
and 1878 by Hukin & Heath’s of Birmingham to the designs of
Christopher Dresser (1834-1904).'! Dresser, like Lewis Day, was a
professional designer for industrial production. His inspiration was no
doubt the Cole circle. He lectured at South Kensington, travelled in
Japan, and brought much Eastern art back to his London home. He
also designed for Clutha glass and Linthorpe pottery!” and wrote
several books on the principles of design, sensible but not especially
original, This makes the two works illustrated all the more astonishing.
In comparison with the silver of the 1851 Exhibition, and actually with
most designs for silver and plate done before 1900 or 1905, Dresser’s
simplicity and creative daring are likewise significant. Both cruet set and
tea-kettle are in every detail reduced to fundamentals, as were Morris’s
own early designs. The base of the cruet set consists of six plain egg-
shaped holders, lids and stoppers are unadorned, there are hardly any
mouldings, and the handle is composed of straight lines-and an exact

10. De Morgan: Plate, 1880s.

semicircle, The tea-kettle is globular, legs and spout come out with an
almost offensive directness, and the handle is again reduced to the
simplest of forms.

If we now look at a plate with a gazelle (Pl. 10), made by De Morgan
at his Merton Works between 1882 and 1888 and now at the Victoria
and Albert Museum in London, the same understanding of decorative
fundamentals appears, only this time in terms of two instead of three
dimensions. There is of course inspiration from Morris and dependence
on Persia, but the bold and ornamental draughtsmanship of the tree
behind the sharply outlined animal and the symbol of water behind the
fishes are remarkably original.

The same blend of originality and tradition which has proved to
secure life beyond its own period for Morris’s designs characterizes the
best in English domestic architecture during the same period. Compar-
able also was the attitude of opposition among the leading architects
against the accepted standards of design.

All through the development of secular architecture in the principal
European countries from 1850 to the end of the century, the same
direction can be noticed. The high tide of the Gothic Revival (Houses
of Parliament: Barry and Pugin, 1835-52) was passing about 1865,
though later and yet pure neo-medieval buildings are of course to be
found in many places (Town Hall, Manchester: Waterhouse, 1868-77;
Glasgow University: G.G.Scott, 1870; Natural History Museum,
London: Waterhouse, 1873-80). Simple Neo-Renaissance was also
coming to an end (Reform Club: Barry, designed 1837; Dresden
Opera: Semper, first building 1838-41; Dresden Gallery: Semper,
1847-54). The next phase was the revival everywhere of an over-
decorated type of Nordic Renaissance (in Paris the extensions to the
Hotel de Ville, already begun in 1837, in England Neo-Elizabethan
from the 1830s onwards, in Germany Neudeutsche Renaissance, after
1870), Immediately after the introduction of this style of decoration,
an equally overdecorated but more colossal Neo-Baroque set in (Paris
Opéra: Garnier, 1861-74; Brussels Palais de Justice : Poelaert, 1866-83).
‘This style remained the official architectural taste in most Continental
countries until after 1900.

11. Webb: Red House, Bexleyheath, Kent, 1859.

In England the evolution followed precisely the same course; but,
since English architecture had been so different from Continental during
the centuries imitated, the result was likewise different. The background
in England was something like this. The overcrowded Elizabethan and
Jacobean Mannerism was superseded in the seventeenth century by
Inigo Jones’s, and then by Christopher Wren’s stately and dignified
Baroque classicism, and then by a cooler, more restrained Palladian
classicism. This grand yet reserved style remained dominant through-
out the eighteenth century as far as churches and large houses were
concerned, It was otherwise with domestic architecture of a more
intimate character. In this, since the Middle Ages, England had de-
veloped an unobtrusive, dignified, and comfortable style of her own.
After the accession of William of Orange, even royal palaces (Kensington
Palace) began to exhibit these qualities. They are the keynote in the
style of London’s squares and streets; they give London her distinctive
character.

12. Webb: The chimney-piece in
Red House, 1859.

In 1859, Morris asked Philip Webb (1831-1915), his friend and
colleague in Street’s studio, to design a house for him and his wife. It
was built in a spirit contrary to that of the past century. As in his
decorative designs, Morris refused any connexion with Italy and the
Baroque and aimed at something akin to the style of the Late Middle
Ages. Webb applied certain Gothic details such as pointed arches and
high-pitched roofs; he also adopted the irregularity of the fourteenth-
and fifteenth-century domestic and especially monastic architecture,
but he never copied. He even admitted the sash-windows of William and
Mary and Queen Anne without ever being afraid of clashes between
the various styles to which he went for inspiration. Red House as a

13, Webb: No. 1 Palace Green, Kensington,
London, 1868.

whole is a building of a surprisingly independent character, solid and
spacious looking and yet not in the least pretentious (Pl.11). This is
perhaps its most important feature. The architect does not imitate
palaces. In designing he thinks of a middle class comfortably off but not
tich. He shows the red brick of the facades without covering it with
plaster as Neo-Classical rules prescribed, and takes the outside appear-
ance of the house as an expression of inside requirements without
attempting a grand and useless symmetry. And in his interiors he
appears even bolder and more independent (P}.12), Detail is deliber-
ately rough and rustic, Individual pieces may be highly ornamented,
for instance by paintings done by Morris's and Webb’s Pre-Raphaelite

14. Shaw: New Zealand Chambers, Leadenhall
Street, London, 1872-3.

friends, but other pieces are left fearlessly sheer, telling their tale
without any borrowed phrases.

In town architecture the counterpart of Red House is the house
at No. 1 Palace Green in Kensington, London, which Webb designed
in 1868 (Pl.13). It exhibits fearlessly two Queen Anne windows and
between them a brick pier of obvious Gothic derivation supporting an
oriel window on a curious ribbed corbel. Of the Domestic Revival, as the
movement in English town and country architecture between 1860 and
1900 is often called, Webb remained the strongest and soundest, if not
the most brilliant exponent. If one looks for brilliance, fecundity of
invention, and sheer joy in novelty, one has to go to Richard Norman

15. Shaw: The architect's house, Ellerdale Road,
Hampstead, London, 1875.

Shaw (1831-1912)! and not to Webb. Shaw’s large country houses (or
rather the country houses of the Shaw-Eden Nesfield partnership)
start in a theatrical, undisciplined, flamboyant imitation-Tudor, still
entirely pre-Morris in spirit. The most characteristic examples are
Leys Wood in Sussex (1869), and Grims Dyke near London (1872).
Then, immediately after Grims Dyke, Shaw changed to something
much more original. The seventeenth century caught his fancy, and in
his first city building, the New Zealand Chambers in Leadenhall Street,
London (Pl.14), now unfortunately destroyed, he dared to combine
bay-windows of a lively English provincial appearance on the second
and third floors with a ground floor exhibiting hardly anything but two

large office windows of many panes separated by wooden glazing bars.
That was in 1872-3. In 1875 his own house in Ellerdale Road, Hamp-
stead, London, is of equal boldness (Pl.15). The key motifs now com-
prise, besides Dutch curved gables of the shape popular in England
between 1630 and 1660, the tall slim sash-windows of William and
Mary and Queen Anne architecture. The composition is deliberately
picturesque, but very sensitively balanced and by no means haphazard.

However successtul this so-called Queen Anne Revival was, Norman
Shaw did not in the long run remain satisfied with it. There was yet
another change in his style - or rather the source of his style; for he
remained to the end faithful to historicism as such, even if his was a
very cavalier treatment of historical precedent. It was in the late eighties
that he remembered what his former partner Eden Nesfield (1835-88)
had done as far back as 1870, and studied in earnest the style of the
smaller country and town house of the later seventeenth and early
eighteenth centuries in England, not only for window motifs but for the
whole of their plain, sensible, well-proportioned, unadorned brick
frontages. Nesfield’s Lodge at Kew Gardens was indeed built in 1866
and has the short brick pilasters usual in England about 1660 or 1670,
a steep pyramid roof and dormer-windows with segmental pediments.
Nesfield’s Kinmel Park (Pl.16) was begun only in 1871 but probably
designed earlier. Its slender segment-headed sash-windows and pedi-
mented dormer-windows stand on their own. Shaw turned to Kinmel
Park for belated inspiration, when he designed No. 170 Queen’s Gate,
London in 1888 (Pl.17). This house, exceptional in Shaw’s cuvre,
started a fashion which reached its climax only in the twentieth century.
It comes indeed as near to the spirit of the new century as one could
come without actually breaking with the past, and in this respect it was
more progressive than the work of any of Shaw’s contemporaries at
home and abroad.

Apart from Shaw and Webb only one other English architect must
here be recorded, Edward Godwin (1833-86), more a designer than an
architect. He was a friend of William Burges, architect of Neo-Gothic
churches and secular buildings, and inventor of some fantastic decora~
tion to which we shall have to revert later. Godwin started with


18. Godwin: White House, Tite Street, Chelsea. Built for Whistler (with
alterations) in 1878.

successful essays in the civic Gothic (Northampton Town Hall, 1861),
but very soon turned domestic and original. In his own house in Bristol,
as early as 1862, he had bare floors, plainly coloured walls, a few Persian
rugs, a few Japanese prints, a few pieces of antique furniture. If
Whistler some years later went in for bare walls, plain-coloured,
Godwin’s influence may well be assumed. In 1878 Godwin designed
for Whistler the White House in Tite Street, Chelsea (PI.18), the most
interesting house in England between Shaw’s in Ellerdale Road and
Shaw’s in Queen’s Gate, original, challenging, witty, if architecture
can be witty, and certainly highly capricious in its fenestration.

Only one other country, besides England, took part in this domestic
revolution of the late nineteenth century: the United States. These
were the first decades in which the New World staked a claim to leader-
ship in architecture, even if still, at least in the domestic field,.a joint
leadership. The carliest architect to advance from provincialism to a

19. Richardson: Stoughton house, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1882-3.

place in the vanguard was Henry Hobson Richardson (1838-86).'! His
F.L. Ames gate lodge in North Easton, Mass., 1880-81, and his Stough-
ton house in Cambridge, Mass., of 1882-3 (PI. 19) are even less derivative
than Shaw’s contemporary houses. Richardson’s use of shingling and
of large-scale random rubble, of boulders, one is tempted to say, and of
picturesque asymmetry shows as much originality as Shaw possessed,
and more vigour. His even more impressive power in the designing of
commercial structures will be mentioned later. Both his town and his
country styles were at once widely imitated by good, bad, and indifferent
architects. Amongst his best followers was Stanford White (1853-1906)
whose Newport Casino’ was built as early as 1881 (Pl.20). he same
qualities are here clearly visible as in the Stoughton house though per-
haps handled a little more elegantly.

at. White: Germantown Cricket Club, Philadelphia, 1891.

Stanford White, less elementary and less hard than Richardson,
could indeed take the same step which Shaw had taken between the
houses of 1875 and of 1888. Only in the case of White the new ideal of
simplicity was not expressed in terms of English Queen Anne but first
in terms of the Central Italian High Renaissance and then of American
Colonial. The examples are well enough known: The Villard houses on
Madison Avenue, New York, of 1885 and the H.A.C. Taylor house in
Newport, R,I., of 1886 or the Germantown Cricket Club, Philadelphia,
of 1891 (Pl.a1).

However stimulating and original these American developments

were, they did not have any immediate repercussions on architecture
in Europe. In England occasional similarities with Richardson occur
(and will be referred to in a later chapter), but the Continent remained
unaware of American innovations for a surprisingly long time. When
Continental architects had grown weary of the boastful spirit of Neo-
Baroque, and had freed themselves from all period forms by a short
plunge into Art Nouveau, they looked to England for help, to English
building and English crafts, and not yet to America.

3 + Eighteen-ninety in Painting

WHEREAS the way for a future style in architecture and design was
cleared by English artists, the new ideals in painting were conceived and
developed on the Continent. The part played by England in the grow-
ing movement was to maintain and revive wholesome traditions in order
to secure a solid foundation upon which the structure could be built;
the task which Continental artists had set themselves was to force a
new faith upon the world of art.

Morris had declined to follow the ways of the generation preceding
him; the leading Continental artists with whom we shall have to deal
in this chapter did the same, or, as it would be better to say, outwardly
the same. For Morris turned against the horrors of 1851, the reformers
of 1890 against Manet, Renoir, and the other Impressionists, artists of
brilliant skill. Morris loathed the superficiality of his immediate pre-
decessors and that Liberalism which was responsible for the social and
artistic conditions in England; the rebels of 1890 also accused their
predecessors of superficiality (though in the changed sense of exclusive
regard for surface qualities) and of more concern with personal than
with community interests, which is the philosophical corollary of
Liberalism.

‘That far, the Morris Movement and the movement in painting which
took shape about 1890 advanced on comparable lines and towards com-
parable aims. But there is one chief difference of means and ends.
Morris dreamed of a revival of medieval society, medieval craft, and
medieval forms; the leaders of European painting in 1890 fought for
something that had never existed before. On the whole, their style was
free from period revival, unencumbered and uncompromising. This

would also apply to the architecture and decoration of Art Nouveau;
but the break was achieved by the painters earlier than by the architects.
Therefore an account of the revolution in painting has to be given
before we can continue the discussion of architectural and decorative
evolution, which is the main task of this book.

Many artists took part in this destructive and constructive movement,
The most powerful characters were two Frenchmen, Cézanne and
Gauguin, a Dutchman, van Gogh, and a Norwegian, Munch, Five
more, besides these, shall be mentioned here: Seurat, Rousseau, Ensor,
Toorop, Hodler.

A comparison between the Fudgement of Paris of 1908 by Renoir
(Pl.22) and the large Bathers by Cézanne, of 1895-1905 (Pl.23)}, may
serve to illustrate the violent change which characterizes European
painting about 1890. Renoir’s painting, in spite of its late date, is the
work of a classic Impressionist; Cézanne (1839-1906), though born
during the same decade as Manet, Renoir, and Monet, was an Impres-
sionist only for a short time. His early style was derived from Delacroix,
Courbet, and the Baroque, and while even in his most mature works he
keeps that beauty of the surface which was the sole ideal of Impression-
ism, his own ideal was in other ways wholly opposed to theirs. The
surface of a landscape by Monet is a glittering veil, Cézanne’s hills and
trees and houses are still and monumental planes, reposing in the
three-dimensional space of the picture.

The charm of Renoir’s Judgement of Paris lies in the play of rosy
bodies, in a landscape of loosely sketched-in green and bluish and
pinkish tones. It is a highly sensuous charm. Renoir said frankly that
in front of a masterpiece he thought of only one thing: to enjoy it. He
once praised a picture by saying that he wanted to kiss it, and he blamed
a great painter because ‘he had never caressed the canvas’.! To catch
all the bliss of a passing instant, all the joy in what the eye can drink in
of light and colour any day and any moment, to make a round, har-
monious composition of it and to paint it with all its atmospheric
glamour: that is Renoir’s aim.

Cézanne despised such a superficial approach. The women in his
Bathers are without any sensuous appeal. They act not on their own

but on behalf of an abstract scheme of construction which is the real
subject of the picture. His aim is to express the lasting qualities of
objects; no transitory beauty occupies his mind, The striding woman
on the left is a diagonal to be continued in the unnaturally slanting
trees. The powerful curve of the back and thigh of the figure sitting on
the left serves to join these diagonals with the four main horizontals.
The faces are hardly detailed, no personal expression is allowed.
Cézanne does not care for the individual, he speculates on the idea of
the Universe. ‘That gang of Impressionists’, he once exclaimed, ‘lack
a master as well as an idea.’* By constructing his pictures with ‘cylinder,
sphere, and cone’,? Cézanne strove to paraphrase the eternal laws of
Nature. Hence he was almost bound to take endless pains over his
works, altering and restarting them over and over again. Up to fifty
sittings were necessary for a portrait, and many of them retain evidence
of this passionate exertion.

For the intensity and passion of Vincent van Gogh (1853-90), this
exertion proved too much. His mind gave way as soon as he had achieved
his task. The course of van Gogh’s life is extremely significant of the
changed attitude which inspired the creative artists about 1890. He
went as a lay-preacher to the poor and destitute, before he had found in
painting an adequate means of expression, and he had to work hard to
acquire the craft of the brush. His mature style is to be found in the
works of only two years, pictures that he painted in a frantic hurry,
‘like the harvester who works silently in the blazing sun, concentrating
on his work’. A picture may represent an empty chair only, but it
means the chair which is empty, now that the friend has tragically de-
parted — and all the overwhelming violence of his feeling is in its colours
and the infuriated strokes of broad brushes. He may paint a café, but
he paints it as ‘a place where one can run mad, or commit a crime’.®
His colour above all is never accidental, never just the rendering of
shades observed in nature. The introduction of a new colour always
suggests an ‘emotion of an ardent temperament’,’ maybe ‘the thought
of a brow’, or ‘the love of two lovers’.?

So not one of his mature portraits is only a portrait, only the repre-
sentation of the features of some indifferent person. In a mysterious

way, much more is embedded in the lines of such a face, the rude shape
of such a body, the hard strokes of such a background (Pl.24). Again
we feel of a sudden confronted with Nature as a creative force, magnifi-
cent and terrifying, and not with the changing surface of nature as
skilfully portrayed by the Impressionist. Manet, in his Jeanne (Spring-
time) of 1882 (Pl. 25), hardly differentiates between the consistence of
the human being and that of the surroundings. This refusal to distin-
guish between the changing and the lasting, the absolute and the
accidental, had emerged in philosophy since the seventeenth century;
it created the art of the Dutch landscape, and culminated in Impres~
sionism. Jeanne is of importance to the artist only in so far as she
is part of nature, reflects colour and light.

But to van Gogh the peasant woman, as he knew her so well, is the
vessel of an idea. She is sacred and indestructible as a symbol. He was
longing to paint ‘pictures of saints and holy women from life which
would seem to belong to another age, and they would be middle-class

24. Van Gogh: Portrait, 1890.

women of the present day’." He wanted to address the people, he be-
lieved that they, in buying cheap and coarse colour prints, were on the
right path, rather than those city dwellers who went to the art exhibi-
tions.? He preferred the simplicity of the popular colour print to the
refinement of contemporary painting, and strove towards a similar sim-
plicity of subject and technique. Only diffidence and underestimation
of his own powers prevented him from venturing upon religious subjects.
He actually began to paint a Garden of Gethsemane but destroyed it
afterwards. By painting all day long, he hoped to drown this ‘terrible
need of religion’.'° But he failed; the ‘terrible need’ appears in whatever
he did, and lends that convulsive intensity to any man, or flower, or
cloud that he chooses as an object for his devotion.

It is true, this need for religion was felt so violently by van Gogh
alone. But would Gauguin (1848-1903) have left Europe and started a
new life amongst the savages of Pacific islands, if he too had not despised
the shallowness of nineteenth-century life? Before he went, he turned

25. Manet: Jeanne (Springtime),
1882.


for a short time to religious painting. There is, in the Edinburgh Gallery,
the picture of Jacob wrestling with the Angel, with the foreground
of Breton women, and there is the Yellow Christ, illustrated in Plate 26.
An Impressionist painter could never have been satisfied with these
wooden forms, so harsh and unpleasing, with these thick black out-
lines - cloisonnism it was called in the Press - and with these heavy,
solid, intense colours, nor would an Impressionist have chosen this
subject, The Impressionist is interested only in what he can see with
his own eyes, and nothing behind the surface is important. He is as
materialistic as any Victorian philosopher. To Gauguin the surface is
immaterial, the casual arrangement of objects in nature is no more than
a stimulus for the conception of a picture. The essential process is to
condense from the impression received something which contains all
the factors of lasting significance. In the Yellow Christ the background
is not one particular piece of French scenery, it is a general symbol of
Brittany, and of the spirit of peasant life, close to the soil and pious in an
elementary, unreasoning way. There is no thought in the faces of these
Breton women. Tiredness after hard work, resignation, and dumb sub~
mission are all they express. The Christ in the centre of the picture also
has all the deliberate primitiveness with which the Expressionists of
1920 endowed their figures - an idol, not an image of Christ crucified,
as the five centuries before Gauguin had evolved it. Gauguin had in fact
copied it from a rustic piece of late medieval Breton wood ‘carving.

Gauguin had worked in Bretagne, at Pont Aven, in 1886 and the
following years.’! A group of young artists had gathered around him,
especially Emile Bernard and Paul Sérusier. In the middle of the Breton
years Gauguin went to Martinique, and in 1891 he left Europe again,
to get away from Western sophistication. He went to Tahiti, stayed
there till 1893, went back to France, and returned to Tahiti for good in
1895. What kept him was that there he found men and women naive
and untouched by the twisted reasoning of Paris, trusting instinct and
their passions; and he found nature fertile and untrimmed.

Nature - that is, the spirit of nature versus the imitation of the surface
appearance of nature, and also, in a much broader sense, nature as a
universal power versus human independence — is one of the mottoes of

<6

af
R
4

Peete

26. Gauguin: Yellow Christ, 1889.

the new movement in European painting about 1890. It may mean, as
in Gauguin and van Gogh, back to instinct and self-abandon, or it may
mean, as in Cézanne, back to the fundamentals of geometry. It may
lead to Expressionism or to Cubism. It may go for inspiration to

cylinder, sphere, and cone, or to Polynesian and medieval carving; the
essential attitude of opposition to the mentality of the nineteenth
century remains the same.

One typical outcome of the rediscovery of early art at its most forceful
was a change of style in the graphic arts, initiated by Gauguin in his
zincographs of 1889. The effect of these prints is confined to violent
contrasts of flat surfaces. Al] delicate shades and atmospheric transitions
are abandoned. No wonder that after a few years Gauguin resorted to
another even more suitable medium for expressing in black and white
those visions which occupied his mind. The woodcut relying entirely
on the process of carving with a knife should not seek after effects that
are not simple and strong (P1.27). Only by a perverse tour de force could
nineteenth-century wood engravers produce superficially something
like the subtle charm of etchings.

Gauguin’s first woodcuts date from the time immediately after he had
settled down on Tahiti. At exactly the same time, his Swiss follower, the
painter Félix Vallotton (1865-1925)'* had discovered the possibilities of
the woodcut for expressing the new feelings of 1890. In his woodcuts
of 1892 and 1893, The Anarchist or Young Girls, he goes so far in re-
ducing nuances and stressing a few main features and gestures as to

AUT; TE PAPE

27. Gauguin: Women at the River (Autti Te Pape), c. 1891-3.

approach caricature. And his principal picture of this period, The Bark
(PI. 28), is perhaps the most astonishing example of deliberate infantilism
that was produced by that generation. In a highly scandalizing manner,
Vallotton has combined a few stylized figures in grotesque chemises
with ten or twelve obtrusively drawn nudes. No wonder that he became

one of the leaders in the conversion of posters into works of art. His
posters begin in 1892.

From the same years date the first French posters whose value is
based on the opposition of simple and brightly-coloured surfaces and
the abolition of space (Toulouse-Lautrec, Steinlen). English artists,
above all the Beggarstaffs (J. Pryde and W’. Nicholson), joined this move-
ment almost at once and produced some of the most striking posters
(Cinderella, Drury Lane Theatre, 1894).'*

Paintings of the same years by Maurice Denis (1870-1945) such as
the April at the Krofler-Miiller Museum at Ortterlo {Pl.29) have a
marked affinity to posters too. he common source is Gauguin by whom

Denis had been much impressed and of whom he knew through their
mutual friend Sérusier.!* The young ladies are all clothed in white, the
path winds in a curve answering the undulations of their garments, and
the hooped branches in the foreground sum up the theme, a theme at
the same time decorative and of a meaning which remains concealed.
One thing one feels certain about is that these maidens are not just out
for a walk to pick flowers. In fact the picture is one of a series of the
Four Seasons, and Denis did other decorative and meaningful schemes
as well, both in painting and in stained glass. He also illustrated books
and designed carpets and wallpaper. This turn to craft in the Gauguin
circle —- a curious and ineffective parallel to the emerging English Arts
and Crafts — is significant too of the abandoning of art for the sake of the
most skilful imitation of nature exclusively. Gauguin worked in pottery
as early as 1886 and very boldly and crudely in 1888-90, and he carved
some reliefs in wood in 1890 - one of them being called Soyez mystérieuses.
And Emile Bernard (1868-1941), friend of Gauguin and of Cézanne
and of van Gogh and a painter of medievalizing religious pictures
which may well have turned Gauguin’s attention to Christian themes,
carved in wood and designed for textiles and stained glass, all as early as
1888, and in 1890 even tried to earn money as a designer ina textile firm
at Lille} We do not know what his designs looked like; those for the
crafts are again flat, hieratic, summary, and as reminiscent of the old
broadsheet as of the new poster. Here is the principal point of com-
parison with the paintings of Seurat and Rousseau. The Grande Jatte
(P1.30) by Georges Seurat (1859-91) appeared as a joke when it was
shown in 1886. The figures are wooden like children’s toys, they move
as awkwardly as if they were driven by clockwork inside, along invisible
rails running parallel to the frame of the picture. We seem to hear the
uc-tac of their movements. The dogs and the ridiculous little monkey
have no life either, This deliberate elimination of atmosphere is all the
more remarkable, as Seurat had started from Impressionism and had
developed his strange mosaic-like technique while endeavouring to push
to its extreme the scientific principle which underlies the Impressionist
dissolution of the surface. The Impressionists had painted in loose
touches and commas of unmixed colour so as to leave to the eye of the

_o

beholder the task of gatheting up the separate dots. This helped to create
that effect of blurred atmosphere which, to the convinced Impressionist,
equals the world, Seurat, in condensing these flaky spots into small
solid units, destroyed the effect aimed at by Renoir and Monet and re-
placed it by an unreal effect of hieratic stiffness.

Seurat must have enjoyed the shock which this apparendy childish
stiffness gave the public. Otherwise, he would not have painted those
circus scenes, like the Chahut (1890) and the Circus Parade (1888), with
the grotesque acrobats and dancers, petrified, it seems, in the most
distorted attitudes. Here again, we are confronted with revolt - as much
as in Cézanne’s Bathers, or van Gogh’s landscapes, or Gauguin’s Tahiti
women — a sudden revelation of the futility of modern civilization.

Only one painter among those most characteristic of 1890 had nothing
of that feeling: Rousseau, /e douanier (1844-1910), to whom destiny
had given such a child-like mind that he could paint primitively without
any conscious revulsion. This art has none of the aesthetic subtleties of
Manet or Degas. But this loss in aesthetic value is counterbalanced by
an increase in live value, and that is in our context tantamount to
historical value.

In his life-size self portrait of 1890 (Pl.31), the colours are crude as
in an old-fashioned calendar. illustration, the forms are as if drawn by a
child. This pretty array of flags, those prim clouds with the balloon
floating about, and the black silhouette of the painter himself looking
rather cross, might have appeared the aberration of an untalented
amateur. Today we can see that all this corresponds to Seurat’s and
Vallotton’s tendencies, and marks a milestone in the development of
Western art. .

Like Gauguin, Rousseau felt attracted by the primitive life of the
tropics. He had once seen them, and, years later, he began to paint
primeval forests, lions, tigers, monkeys, and lion-hunters. It is not easy
to appreciate his attitude in doing this. His pictures lack that sacred
quality which Gauguin, and later on Nolde, embedded in their simple
tales. But they are strikingly sincere in their childish treatment, with,
trees and wild animals such as infants would enjoy and fear in their
‘picture-books. It may well be that, by such an apparently helpless

31. Rousseau: Self Portrait, 1890.

technique, Rousseau has come nearer to the world of the savages than
Gauguin with his superior knowledge of art.

At first sight one may also take as mere fun the many paintings by
James Ensor (1860-1949) which represent masked revellers. But their

fn am ae #
ee

32. Ensor: Intrigue, 1890.

true meaning is entirely opposed to that of Seurat’s or Rousseau’s
works. Ensor too had been an Impressionist for some time. He began
to paint masks even before he broke away from the tenets of Impres-
sionism. In his mature works, those painted since about 1886 (PI. 32),
there is nothing of Impressionist naturalism, nothing either of
Rousseau’s simple-heartedness or Seurat’s directness of approach. He
painted those groups of people with their grinning masks not because
he enjoyed festive confusion, but because the mask allows the artist to
fix a lasting expression of demoniac villainy on a face. This is again a
denial of the nuance, a ‘back to fundamentals’, though to Ensor the
ultimate fundamental to be reached is the baseness of human nature.
The truth of this interpretation of his attitude can be proved by looking
at other subjects which Ensor painted or etched during those decisive
years. His principal paintings are the Tribulations of St Anthony of 1887
and The Entry of Christ into Brussels of 1888. Here again the Saint or
the God is surrounded by hideous demons made even more terrifying
by the softness and sometimes sugariness of Ensor’s colours. But where
such fleshy pinks and silky blues and sweet rich greens serve to add to
the sheer surface joy of an Impressionist painting, they intensify in

a

WUSEE QE PEINTURE

VALE EXPOSITION

8 FEVRIER-8 MARS

ores 5 heures

Ainztrstes

Towne S 8 Casey Ae

DINTRED fo CEN TIML>

wes CGMUEMIS 61 CONFERENCES trans sre on 33. Khnopff: Poster, 1891.

Ensor the grim contrast with the anxieties of the scenes he depicts.

Wherever one looks, a new conception of the ‘subject-picture’ is an
integral part of the movement of 1890. Thinking of Impressionism we
think of landscapes, portraits, still lifes, not of religion and philosophy.
There were, it is true, many outside Impressionism who painted
Patriotic or allegorical subjects and anecdote and genre, but amongst
the spiritual leaders few between the English Pre-Raphaelites, that is
the last descendants of early-nineteenth-century Romanticism, and the
pioneers of 1890 took an interest in subject-matter as such. And when
the movement of 1890 turned once more to symbolism, inspiration

83

came more often than is usually realized through the manifold, if not
very deep, channels of the English Arts and Crafts which were still fed
from the Pre-Raphaelite fountain-head. Such is the case with the two
French painters who stood out between 1860 and 1890 as exponents of
an art expressive of thoughts more profound than what everyday life
could offer: Gustave Moreau (1826-98), Huysmans’s friend, and Odilon
Redon (1840-1916).

The connecting link between Moreau, the Pre-Raphaelites, and the
new style of 1890 is the work of the Belgian Fernand Khnopff (1858-
1921). He had English blood, a British wife, and spent several years in
England. His first symbolistic picture, Sphinx, was painted in 1884.

wT

‘h

34. Toorop: Faith Giving Way, 1894

35. Hodler: The Chosen One, 1893-4.

His principal works date from about 1891-6 (The Offering, 1891). The
poster shown in Plate 33 is of 1891 and advertised an exhibition of Les
Vingt, a group of artists at Brussels to which we shall have to revert
later. The typography is still wholly Victorian, undisciplined and
ficentious without being truly original, but the figure on the right, four
years later repeated in the painting Arum Lily, stands erect, in a hieratic
pose as if she were in some kind of ritual procession. '@

To the position of Khnopff in Belgium corresponds that of Jan
Toorop (1858-1928) in Holland.'’ He too started under the influence
of French nineteenth-century tendencies, he too acquired a personal
knowledge of England (about 1885), he too had a British wife (that is
one born in Ireland of English and Scottish parents), and he too arrived
at symbolism about 1890. The cartoon which is called Faith Giving
Way (PL. 34) was drawn in 1894 and is Toorop’s first work showing the
new style fully developed: an odd entwinement of gaunt limbs, under-
standable only by reading an elaborate programme. Both this obscurity

and the intricacy of the pattern of human bodies bear witness to two
more sources of Toorop’s style, one doubtful, the other certain; namely
Blake’s linear art and hermetic symbolism, and the arts of Java, brought
close to Toorop by Holland’s Eastern possessions. It is indeed illumin-
ating in this connexion to remember that Toorop was born in Java, that
his father had some Javanese blood, and that in the mid-eighties
T.A.C.Colenbrander had started a Dutch vogue for the imitation of
Indonesian Batik-printing, just as Gauguin in his rare wooden statuettes
of the nineties!® was to imitate the idols of the West Indies and the
Pacific,

More successful than Toorop’s and purer than Gauguin’s was the
style of the Swiss Ferdinand Hodler (1853-1918) which was developed
to express sacred truth in terms of line and cool precise colour. Hodler’s
first portrait, showing a marked tendency towards hieratic simplification,
dates from 1888; his first allegorical picture, The Night, from r18go.
The painting called The Chosen One, which is illustrated in Plate 35,
was conceived in 1893 and carried out in 1893-4, A tapestry, not a
picture: that is what we feel. No spatial, and above all no atmospheric
values are admitted. The six guardian angels do not stand on the ground;
they are supposed to be flying, but do not give any such impression.
Neither is there any air between their feet and the grass, or between
their bodies and the background. As six long and slender candle-like
shapes, they surround in a shallow ellipse the small and sparse figure of
the boy praying. His arms and hands are again as delicate as those drawn
by Toorop or Khnopff. Sensuous charm of flesh and skin would detract
from the main content. An icy air of clear abstraction rests upon
Hodler’s work. No wonder that, in his old age, he turned towards Alpine
landscapes. Artists who struggled for such purity of style and precision
of rendering were bound to look down scornfully on the surface realism
and loose composition of the Impressionist school.

But the greatest Germanic painter of his generation, much greater in
power than Hodler and Toorop, is Edvard Munch (1863-1944). Like
so many of the leaders of that generation, he had gone through a phase
of Impressionism. But while working in Paris under the influence of
Pissarro, he imbibed, first perhaps unconsciously, the style of Gauguin,

36. Munch: The Cry, 1893.

and thus gained strength to overcome the dangerous charm of super-
ficial beauty. Soon he started, in a surprisingly original manner, simpli-
fying and leaving out all non-essential features. By the beginning of the
nineties, the phase of transition was at an end. His paintings, woodcuts,
and lithographs of 1893, 1894, 1895 are a synthesis of the new move-
ment’s Germanic aspect, as strong and as serious as van Gogh’s paintings

and drawings of 1889 and 1890, and yet utterly different in appearance.

In the picture The Cry (PI.36), natural data are reduced to the mini-
mum: sea, hill, beach, and pier. More than that would be unnecessary.
The face of the shrieking creature —- we do not even recognize its sex — is
defined only so far as the intense expression demands. The cry shapes
this face, and it pervades the whole picture, carried by visible waves of
sound, So Munch achieves his symbolical expression of the oneness
and the Strindbergian horror of the Universe. The subject matters as
much to him as to Toorop and Hodler. He painted Jealousy and
Puberty, and even such critical subjects as The Kiss and The Day After.
But he is never sophisticated, or verbose, or melodramatic, though,
during these years of open revolt, he seems at times to work under
morbid obsessions.

But the quality, above all, which raises Munch to the level of van
Gogh is that he does not depend on the symbolic subject. He is just as
strong in his landscapes and portraits. Whatever he paints, he makes us
feel the inexhaustible power of Nature parturient.

How far, that is the most essential question in our context, do the
new tendencies of the painters discussed here coincide with or bear
upon those of the architectural style of the Modern Movement? In
summing up the qualities which distinguish the artists of 1890 from
their predecessors, an attempt will be made to emphasize those which
find an echo in contemporary architecture and decoration.

Instead of a variety of charming surface effects, Cézanne, Gauguin,
Rousseau believe in the unbroken flat surface; Hodler, Munch, Toorop
in the rhythmically drawn outline, as a more intense means of artistic
expression. Strong colours and primitive shapes replace the abundance
of delicate nuances; hard schemes of composition, the liberty of appar-
ently casual picturesqueness. Not closeness to reality but expressiveness
of pattern is what matters; not quick observation of natural facts but
their perfect translation on to a plane of abstract significance, Carried
over into the artist’s personal outlook, this means seriousness, religious
conscience, fervent passion, and no longer spirited play or skilful crafts-
manship, It means, instead of art for art’s sake, art serving something
higher than art itself can be.

Exactly the same qualities appear at the same time in literature. The
movement away from naturalism and surface interest in the widest
sense of these words was universal.!* It can be seen in the Belgian
Maeterlinck (born in 1862) and his Pedléas et Mélisande of 1892,°° in the
Englishman Cscar Wilde’s (born 1854) Salomd of 1893, in the German
Hauptmann’s (born 1862) sudden change from his Weavers of 1892 to
his Hannele of 1893, and in France even earlier in Verlainc, Mallarmé,
and Rimbaud (born in 1844, 1842, and 1854 respectively).

But, just as in painting, there are two aspects to this literary move-
ment. Symbolism may be a strength and a weakness — an endeavour
towards sanctity or an affectation. Cézanne and van Gogh stand on the
one side, Toorop and Khnopff on the other, the former strong, self-
disciplined, and exacting, the latter weak, self-indulgent, and relaxing.
So the one led into a future of fulfilment, that is the establishment of
the Modern Movement of the twentieth century, the other into the
blind alley of Art Nouveau. It is with Art Nouveau that we must now
first concern ourselves.

4- Art Nouveau

IF the long, sensitive curve, reminiscent of the lily’s stem, an insect’s
feeler, the filament of a blossom, or occasionally a slender flame, the
curve undulating, flowing, and interplaying with others, sprouting from
corners and covering asymmetrically all available surfaces, can be re-
garded as the /eitmotif of Art Nouveau, then the first work of Art
Nouveau which can be traced is Arthur H. Mackmurdo’s cover of his
book on Wren’s City Churches published in 1883 (P1.37). We have
come across Mackmurdo once before, as the founder of the Century
Guild in 1882, the earliest group of artists to follow Morris’s teachings,
and we shall have to go back to him later for his architectural work. He
was a true pioneer in everything he tackled in these early years of his
long life. He was born in 1851 and died in 1942. Much recent research
has been devoted to the sources of so amazing a design as this title-page
and, in connexion with it, to the sources of Art Nouveau.! Mackmurdo’s
immediate source no doubt was certain designs of the Pre-Raphaelites,
either whole paintings or cartoons, e.g. by Burne-Jones (PI. 38), or
details, e.g. by Rossetti. Equally unquestionable is the dependence of
Rossetti on Blake, Here the most original compositions of the early and
the late nineteenth century are firmly linked. But there were also
potentialities of Art Nouveau, which one is tempted to label proto-Art
Nouveau, within the Gothic Revival in English architecture and design,
just as the theories of the Gothicists had stimulated the theories of the
reformers of the mid and later nineteenth century. A case in point is
for instance an overmantel in the highly medieval house which William
Burges built for himself in Melbury Road, Kensington in 1875-80

(P1.39).

Mackmurdo’s daring was first imitated by other designers for books
and magazines, notably Charles Ricketts and Charles Shannon whose
Dial began to appear in 1889. A few designer-decorators also followed
at once, Heywood Sumner? being the most interesting of them. The
Morrisite style of the Arts and Crafts Movement could indeed easily
be given an Art Nouveau twist.? In fact, while the various trends must
here be presented in separation, they were not scen so at the time, and
it should never be forgotten that Gilbert and Sullivan’s ‘sentimental
passion of a vegetable fashion’ and their ‘ poppy or a lily in his medieval
hand’ do not refer to full-grown Art Nouveau, but come out of Patience
produced in 1882 - one year before the Mackmurdo book on the Wren
churches,

Abroad the effect of all this started after 1890. Generally speaking
the designers were listened to less than the typographers and book
illustrators, and none of them was received with more fascination than
Aubrey Beardsley,’ who had only eight years to show his questionable
genius before he died in 1898 at the age of twenty-six. He had begun as
a belated follower of the Pre-Raphaelites, and broken away from them

AIH MAC KMURDO,ARIBA,

37. Mackmurdo: ‘Title-page, 1883.

39. Burges: Chimney-piece in his own house, Melbury
Road, Kensington, ¢. 1880.

in 1892 while he was working on the illustrations to the Morre a’ Arthur.
A particularly complete example of his exceedingly personal and ourré
handwriting is the drawing Siegfried (Pl. 40), published in 1893 in the
first issue of the Srudic. The arrangement of short C-curves, little
flowers, lines of minute dots, is different from the manner of any other
artist. The way in which Beardsley covers tree trunks and flower stalks
and the body of the monster with dainty ornament, shows how regard-
less he is of the meaning of the scene represented. His concern is with
decoration, an elegant display of intricate draughtsmanship, highly
artificial and sophisticated. All this has nothing to do with Siegfried, or

40. Beardsley: Siegfried, 1893.

with Wagner, and only very litde with the seriousmindedness of the
Pre-Raphelites, Morris, and the Arts and Crafts.>

A similarity of approach and graphic style between Beardsley and
the Toorop of the same years will be evident to anybody who remembers
the Faith Giving Way illustrated in the previous chapter (PI.34). The
Three Brides, a painting done two years later, that is in 1893 (Pl. 41),
shows perhaps even more clearly the characteristics of Art Nouveau in
terms of a figure composition. Disregarding for the moment the mystic
content of the canvas, we need only look at its long curves, the slender-
ness of the proportions, the flower-like delicacy of bodies and limbs,
the strangely slanting profiles, in order to recognize the same English
sources as in Beardsley, and the same conscious effort towards a com-
plicated, sinuous, intertwined, all-over pattern,

Again, looking back at Hodler’s The Chosen One (P1.35) purely from

41. Toorop: The Three Brides, 1893.

the point of view of the forms he favours, the long-drawn-out lines of
the garments will be recognized as Art Nouveau, and the hair of the
angels, the slender stem of the young tree in the middle, some of the
flowers held by long delicate hands, and the tortuous movements of
these hands. The same is evident in Denis’s April (Pl.29), with its
sinuous lines of composition and the interlocked curves of the branches
in the foreground.

Or take Munch’s The Cry (P1.36). The importance in it of sweeping
curves as carriers of expression has already been emphasized. It is even
more important in his lithograph Madonna (P1.42) which was done in
1895 after a painting of 1894. The long wavy hair and the sinuous move-
ment of the figure, the swaying lines in the background, and above all the
odd frame with the embryo and the floating spermatozoa, make this
work one of the most remarkable instances of Art Nouveau in painting,

original and striking in appearance, independent of tradition, but
“questionable as to its sanity and vital value. In Munch, a strong, sane,
and unsophisticated painter, this was a passing phase. He soon cast off the
mannerisms of Art Nouveau and retained only its genuinely decorative
qualities for the development of his monumental style, Incidentally, the
same is true of Hodler, to whom, in a similar way, Art Nouveau — if we
can call his style duriag the nineties Art Nouveau — was only a means
of attaining the ornamental clarity of his later wall paintings and land-
scapes.

But Art Nouveau as a movement does not originally belong to paint-
ing, nor, indeed, is the term as a rule applied to painting at all. It means
usually a short but very significant fashion in decoration, and if the
works of painters and draughtsmen have here been given precedence
over those of architects and designers, the reason is that the new orna-
mental fashion in the first works of its two creators appeared later than
in pictures, book illustration, and the like.

The two creators referred to were Louis Sullivan in Chicago and
Victor Horta in Brussels. Sullivan (1856-1924) was probably essentially

42. Munch: Madonna, 1895.

43. Sullivan: Auditorium Building, Chicago, 1888. Bar

original, Horta (1861-1947), no doubt familiar with recent English and
Continental developments. Sullivan’s ornament remained solitary,
Horta’s created a craze which for a few years swept most countries on
the Continent. How Sullivan came to evolve these curious tangles of
tendrils, cabbagey, scalloped leaves, and coral reef growths remains a
mystery. Can they really rest on no more promising ground than Gray’s
Botany? Or can one dimly recognize behind them the cabbagey forms
of Gothic Revival foliage? Another look at Burges’s fireplace might be
advisable." By the time Sullivan designed the interiors of the Auditorium
Building in Chicago, that is by 1888, his ornamental style was complete

(PI. 43). It appears again in the Anshe Ma’ariv Synagogue of 1890-91 and
at its wildest in the Carson Pirie Scott Store of 1903-4, of which, for
very different reasons, more will be said later. Sullivan’s ornamental
ideal was an ‘organic decoration befitting a structure composed on
broad and massive lines’,’ and so his theory of severe functionalism
discussed in a foregoing chapter cannot be understood without a careful
look at his flowing ornament, nor his ornament without a vivid memory
of the austerity of the main lines and blocks of his buildings.

This is what distinguishes him from Horta who remains, if not
wholly, at least primarily, a decorator. Horta’s magnum opus is his first
building, the house No. 6 rue Paul-Emile Janson, formerly 12 rue de
Turin, in Brussels (Pl. 44). It was begun in 1892, and the decoration of
its interior, especially the memorable staircase, is wholly dependent on
that /eitmotif of Art Nouveau which has been analysed apropos Mack-
murdo’s and Beardsley’s and Toorop’s designs. The same tendrils are
painted on the walls, laid in mosaic on the floor, and bent in iron up the
brackets at the top of the supporting shafts and all along the handrail.
It seems almost unbelievable that Horta should have created this
decoration without knowing of the Century Guild, the Dia/, and other
English decoration, although he would not admit dependence on
England.* This is different from Henri van de Velde, Horta’s most
important fellow-fighter for the new ornamental style, who told the
author that he had seen Toorop’s first mature works with the keenest
delight.

As for the relations of the young Belgians with England, van de Velde
writes® that the discovery of the English revival of craft was made by
A.W. Finch (born in 1854), a painter of half-English descent who later
became a potter, that he bought a few things which strongly impressed
his friends, but that, even earlier (in 1884), Gustave Serrurier-Bovy of
Li¢ge had been in England, and that his furniture thereafter showed
influence from the Arts and Crafts. However, Serrurier-Bovy himself
said proudly that by 1894 he was ‘entirely free of any reminiscences
from past or English styles’.!° By that time much progress had been
made. A shop called Compagnie Japonaise had shown English modern
wallpapers and metalwork at Brussels in 1891, and in 1892 Les Vingt

mat

44. Horta: No. 6 rue Paul-Emile Janson, Brussels,
1893. Staircase.

appeared, a society of young artists to which we shall have to refer once
more later on, which exhibited work by Crane and by Selwyn Image,
Mackmurdo’s friend and collaborator in the Century Guild; and van
de Velde, so he tells us, had begun to collect samples of English decora-
live art privately, Very soon after that, van de Velde says, the translation
of the English style into something Belgian began. In writing this, he
is evidently alluding to himself. For he is completely silent about the
part played by Horta and also Paul Hankar (1861-1901), the first to
pick up the style of the rue Paul-Emile Janson.'! While this omission

An

45. Van de Velde: Chairs for his own house at Uccle, near Brussels,
1894-5.

no doubt detracts from the historical value of van de Velde’s account,
the fact remains true that his was the most comprehensive and philo-
sophical mind amongst the young architects and designers of Belgium.
We have already met him as a theorist. As an artist he began by
painting in the style of Barbizon and then of the Neo-Impressionists.
It was, when he was twenty-nine, in 1892, that under the influence of
William Morris’s teaching and the art of Pont Aven he gave up painting
and devoted himself to applied art. He designed wallpapers, brocades,
decoration for books, furniture, The chairs shown in Plate 45 were made
for his own house at Uccle near Brussels in 1894 or 1895. They are Art
Nouveau in the swing of their curves, but at the same time these curves
are filled with a tense energy that is quite unlike the luxurious grace of
Horta’s lines. Behind Horta one can always feel nature, vegetable and
animal nature. Van de Velde’s design is rigidly abstract and — theoretically
at least - meant to illustrate the function of the object or part of the object
to which it is attached. ‘Dynamographique’ is what he called it later,
and he defined his intent as ‘structurizing’. He postulates an ornamental

art based on almost scientific laws of attraction and repulsion, and
hence as far from arbitrariness as the creation of the engineer. Here the
connexion between his admiration for the machine and his own artistic
style becomes visible,!* a connexion which most of his over-decorated
works of about 1900 would hardly lead one to expect.'® And yet, at the
time when his fantastic interior of Haby’s barber shop in Berlin was
new (1901), the public was greatly scandalized by the frank exposure of
water pipes, gas pipes, and pipes for electric wiring. ‘You don’t wear
your guts like a watch-chain across your waistcoat,’ was the comment of
Berliners upon this odd mixture of functionalism and Art Nouveau.

In the chairs for Uccle, the functional side of van de Velde’s activities

is predominant. The unity of grace and energy in such objects inspired
E. de Goncourt to his excellent and prophetic term ‘Yachting Stvle’
which he coined when van de Velde’s works were first made known to
the Paris public. Van de Velde’s recognition was due to Samuel Bing
(born 1838), an art dealer from Hamburg who had moved to Paris in
1871, gone to visit the Far East in 1875, started a shop for Oriental art
in Paris with a branch in New York, travelled in the United States for
the French Government in 1893, reported to it on architecture and
design with a remarkable appreciation of Richardson and Sullivan and
of the powers of the machine to ‘vulgariser a Pinfini la joie des formes
pures’, and opened a shop for modern art in the rue de Provence on
26 December 1895 which he called L’Art Nouveau.'! Bing, together
with the German art critic Julius Meier-Graefe, had discovered van de
Velde’s house at Uccle, and he invited the artist to design four rooms
for his shop. The effect of this on France was immediate: enthusiasm
on the one side, furious criticism on the other, led by Octave Mirbeau
in Figaro who wrote of ‘? Anglais victeux, la Juive morphinemane ou le
Belge roublard, ou une agréable salade de ces trois poisons’. More serious
adversaries warned designers against succumbing to the spell, and
pointed to the excellent commercial position which French industrial
art had attained by remaining faithful to eighteenth-century traditions.
Convinced friends of the new style emphasized the fact that several
French artists had already for some time worked independently on
similar lines. Emile Gallé (1846-1904) in the art of glassmaking, and

Auguste Delaherche (1857-?) in the art of pottery, are the most note-
worthy names. Gallé had in fact begun to exhibit glass of an utterly
un-Victorian delicacy and fantastic colours as early as 1884.15 Its shapes
(Pl. 46) were based on Gallé’s deep belief in nature as the sole legitimate
source of inspiration for the craftsman - something of the faith in the
organic which we have met with in Sullivan and van de Velde.

The influence of Gallé’s glass was certainly wide even before Bing
opened his shop in 1895 and exhibited it consistently. For in New York
Louis Comfort Tiffany (1848-1933) had started to produce his Favrile
Glass as early as 1893 (Pl. 47).!® Tiffany in his turn impressed Bing
considerably on the latter’s visit to America. And in Germany Karl
Koepping (1848-1914) produced glass vessels of exquisite fragility and
slenderness in 1895 at the latest.'?

Between 1895 and the early years of the twentieth century, Art
Nouveau had as great a vogue in France as in Belgium, In 1895 some
young architects and craftsmen had founded a group which they called
Les Cing, One of them was the architect Tony Selmersheim (born
1871), In 1896 Charles Plumet (2861~1925) joined, and the group
became Les Six, The group exhibited and called its exhibitions L’art
dans tout, Their work is Art Nouveau without question, but neither as
original nor as genuine as that of the Belgians or of the furniture-
designer Eugéne Gaillard in Paris or of the designers of Nancy such as
Louis Majorelle (1859-1926) and Augustin Daum (1854-1909).

In architecture the mest interesting of the French is Hector Guimard
(1867-1942), whose best-known buildings are the highly Art Nouveau
stations of the Paris Métro. These date from 1900.!§ Earlier is his re-
markable block of flats called Castel Béranger which is No. 16 rue La
Fontaine, Passy, This was built in 1894-8 and, while architecturally
less rewarding than Horta’s houses, exhibits much uninhibited orna-
mental detail, especially in the ironwork of its gates (Pl. 48).

There is indeed a curious relationship between Art Nouveau and
iron, The use of iron in facades was nothing new; its functional aspects
will be discussed in the next chapter. Nor were the ornamental advan-
tages of iron for fagades a discovery of the late nineteenth century. A
line can be drawn from the cast-iron tracery of the earliest bridge ever

48. Guimard: Castel Béranger, No. 16 rue La Fontaine,
Passy, Paris, 1894-8.

built of that material, the Coalbrookdale Bridge of 1777, and the cast-
iron window tracery in early Gothic Revival churches, to the rich orna-
mentation of the Coal Exchange by Bunning in London (1847-9)!%
and the Oxford Museum (1857-60) and so to the plates and text of
Viollet-le-Duc’s Entretiens where in the second volume published in
1872 iron trails and leaves appear side by side with iron vaulting-ribs,
the one for reasons of the tensile strength of iron, the other for reasons
of its ductile nature (P1.72). Viollet’s suggested ornamentation in iron
must have been Horta’s principal source in the rue Paul-Emile Janson
and led him on to the triumphs of Art Nouveau ironwork at the Maison
du Peuple in Brussels of 1896-9, which in its turn was followed by
Paul Saintenoy’s Old England Store of 1899, also in Brussels, and
Frantz Jourdain’s Samaritaine Store in Paris of 1905.

Whereas the dependence of France on Belgium in this respect as well
as in all others regarding Art Nouveau seems now on the whole estab-
lished,*® the interesting fact about Germany is that while she also joined
the movement !ater than Belgium she kept surprisingly intransigent in

the works of her best artists. In 1895, that is two years before an
exhibition, held,at Dresden in 1897, made van de Velde known in
Germany, a group of young German artists had started with aims
similar to his.*! Only a few names can be given here.** Otto Eckmann
and Hermann Obrist are the two most interesting personalities during
the years 1895 to 1898. After this date, the Viennese Sezession took the
lead. Eckmann*? (1865-1902) had been a painter until 1894. Now he
became converted, just like Morris and van de Velde. He burnt all his
pictures and started as a designer. When, in 1895, Mecicr-Graefe suc-
ceeded in starting Pan, a magazine of modern art and literature in
Germany, Eckm.ann designed the decoration of several pages (Pl. 49).
His ornament is completely different from Horta’s and van de Velde’s,
and yet equally original, impressive, and representative of Art Nouveau:

49. Eckmann: Decoration of two pages in the magazine Pan, 1895.

a flat pattern again, with long curves gracefully entwined, and again full
of the joy of tracing many consonant lines.

But Eckmann stood on the side of Gallé and against van de Velde in
his faith in nature. He does with leaves and stalks what van de Velde
did by means of abstract form. This contrast between van de Velde and
Eckmann and between Veldians and Eckmannites was already noticed
in 1903.°! It is not quite clear where Eckmann got his initial ideas from.
He did not know van de Velde when he began, though he must of course
have known the English book art of Ricketts and Beardsley. Of con-
nexions with Gallé we have no information, But it may be worth
recording that Toorop exhibited in Munich in 1893, and that the famous
Munch Exhibition in Berlin, which caused so much controversy, took
place in 1892.

In 1892 Obrist (1863-1927), whose later enthusiasm for machine art
has already been mentioned, was in Florence starting an embroidery
workshop, which was transferred to Munich in 1894. The ornament on
his cushions and hangings (P1. 50) is again less abstract than that of the
Belgians and the French. But his favourite forms are only vaguely
reminiscent of particular forms in nature. They recall stalks as well as
shells, and indented carapaces of reptiles as well as froth and foam.*
His influence on Endell is evident and of historic importance. Any
picture of Art Nouveau would certainly be incomplete without a dis-
cussion of Endell, However, his contribution to the Modern Movement
proper is much more essential than to Art Nouveau. He - and for the
same reasons two more of the most fascinating Art Nouveau designers,
Olbrich in Vienna and Mackintosh in Britain - must be left to a later
chapter. °®

As far as Britain is concerned, it will have been noticed that, after
she had created the style in the eighties she disappeared out of this
survey. The reason is that she kept away from Art Nouveau as soon
as it became the fashion, When in 1900 some objects of Continental
Art Nouveau were presented to the Victoria and Albert Museum, a
letter of protest was sent to The Times signed by three architects of the
Norman Shaw school and with Arts and Crafts sympathies. In it these
objects are called wrong in principle and lacking in ‘regard for the

50. Obrist: Embroidery, 1893.

materials employed’.*? Mcreover, Lewis F. Day said that Art Nouveau
‘shows symptoms . . . of pronounced disease’** and Walter Crane speaks
of ‘that strange decorative disease known as L’Art Nowvean’.** This
is indeed noteworthy (and no doubt due to reasons of national character) ;
for the functions of the Arts and Crafts in England and of Art Nouveau
on the Continent were to a large degree the same. They are both the
‘Transitional’ between Historicism and the Modern Movement and
they both were bent upon reviving handicraft and the decorative arts.
Hence, on the Continent, they were nowhere seen as opposing cach
other, but they appeared as a rule together, those whe advocated the
one also advocating the other. This can best be scen in examining what
exhibitions of decorative art were held on the Continent and what
magazines of decorative art were started.

The very fact that so many magazines suddenly appeared and so
many exhibitions suddenly took place and were well attended shows
the vigour of the revival on the Continent. The first of the new magazines
was of course English, the Studio, founded in 1893, just before England’s
influence on the Continent set in. Amongst the artists discussed in 1893
and 1894, the following may be noted: Beardsley, Crane, Voysey,

Toorop, Khnopff. Other articles dealt with new furniture at Liberty’s,
the renaissance of pottery in France, the Munich Sezession, the New
English Art Club. The first of the Continental magazines, Pan, came
out in Germany in 1895. One of its two editors was Meier-Graefe who,
as we have seen, was one of the discoverers of van de Velde and who, in
1897, started a shop, La Maison Moderne, in Paris in competition with
Bing’s.°° Among the chief supporters and contributors were Lichtwark
and Karl Koepping. Jugend and Simplizissimus, both mainly satirical
papers, followed Pan in 1896. In 1897, Art et décoration, and L’Art
décoratif were started in France, Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration and
Dekorative Kunst in Germany. Again in 1897, the Revue des arts
décoratifs in Paris was reformed, and in Vienna one year later Kunst
und Kunsthandwerk and Ver Sacrum, the magazine of the Vienna
Sezession, began to appear.*! One year later again Russia appeared on
the scene with Afir Jsskustva. Some examples of what these periodicals
discussed may help to give an impression of the manifold interests at
that moment. In its first years Pan printed poetry by Verlaine and
Mallarmé, by Dehmel, Liliencron, Schlaf, illustrations by Klinger, von
Hofmann, Stuck, decoration by Eckmann, Th. Th. Heine, articles on
Munthe, Obrist, Tiffany, designs by Crane, Townsend, Voysey. In
Dekorative Kunst and Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration we find articles on
English lamps, Copenhagen porcelain, Voysey, essays by Endell and
Bing, illustrations of works by van de Velde, Hankar, Lemmen,
Serrurier, Plumet, by Brangwyn, Ashbee, Cobden-Sanderson, and by
Melchior Lechter, the illustrator of the Stefan George group. In Art et
décoration, Horta and van de Velde are discussed, as are La Libre
Esthétique in Brussels, the English Arts and Crafts, Lalique’s early glass,
and furniture by Plumet and Selmersheim. At the same time the
Studio also illustrated the work of Tiffany, Plumet, Aubert, Selmersheim,
and some German representatives of Art Nouveau. Mir Isskustva in its
first year showed reproductions or discussed the work of Beardsley,
Brangwyn, Burne-Jones, Delaherche, Koepping, Vallotton, and
Whistler.??

In the matter of exhibitions, England was again first in the field. The
Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society showed works of artistic handicrafts

gr. Plumet: Interior.

in 1888, 1889, 1890, 1893, 1896. In Paris the Salon du Champs de Mats
of 1891 was the first where works of the decorative arts appeared side
by side with paintings.°? In the same year the Salon des Indépendants
showed three of Gauguin’s ceramic pieces and one carved relief in
wood.*4 However, the most adventurous art exhibitions on the Continent
were those brought together by the group Les Vingt in Brussels, called
La Libre Esthétique since 1894.95 They had pictures by Khnopff,
Ensor, Whistler, Liebermann as early as 1884, Raffaelli, Uhde, Manzini,
Kréyer in 1885, Monet, Renoir, Israels, Monticelli, Redon in 1886. The
concurrent appearance of men like Renoir and Whistler on the one hand,
and Ensor and Redon on the other, shows how strangely intermixed
Impressionism and Post-Impressionism were in their action on foreign
countries. In 1887 Les Vingt had asked Sickert and Seurat to exhibit,
in 1888° Toulouse-Lautrec and Signac, in 1889 Gauguin, Steer, and
Klinger,'in 1890 Cézanne, van Gogh, Segantini, Sisley, and Minne,
in 1891 Crane and Larsson. In 1892 they included for the first time
stained glass, embroidery, ceramics (Delaherche), and illustrated books

TNO

(Horne, Image). After this, the exhibition of 1894 contained, besides
works of Beardsley and Toorop, wallpapers and fabrics by Morris,
silver by Ashbee, books of the Kelmscott Press, posters by Lautrec,
and a complete studio interior furnished by Serrurier, and in 1895
Voysey was represented. Finally in 1896 van de Velde did a whole
‘salle de five o'clock’, Meanwhile L’QEuvre artistique had asked the
Glasgow School of Art under its remarkable head Francis Newbery to
show at an exhibition in Liége. There was at the same exhibition also
work by Ashbee, Burne-Jones, Crane, Morris, Sumner, and Townsend.**
Two years later the first exhibition on similar lines was held in Germany.
Munich, in the Glaspalast Exhibition in 1897, reserved two small rooms
for applied art. Amongst the artists represented were Eckmann, Endell,
Obrist, Th. Fischer, Ditlfer, and Riemerschmid. On a larger scale was
the Dresden Exhibition, held also in 1897, to which the organizers had
brought whole sections of Bing’s L’Art Nouveau.

This shop, which has been mentioned more than once, gave the whole
movement its name, at least in England and France. The German term
Jugendstil was taken from the Jugend which, as has been said, was
started in the same year, 1896; and the Italian term Stile Liberty comes,
curiously enough, from Libeity’s, the furnisher’s and draper’s shop
then in the Strand in London, which during the nineties went in for
materials and colours suitable for Art Nouveau schemes. So by sheer
chance liberty, youth, and novelty appear together in the names given
to this remarkable if brief and transitory movement.

With novelty it must most certainly be connected, and liberty at least
in the sense of licence is applicable too. But whether, looked at at a
distance of more than two generations, Art Nouveau has a youthful
appearance must remain doubtful. For a revolution it is suspiciously
sophisticated and refined, and — an even more portentous doubt — it was
entirely lacking in a social conscience. A little while ago it was called a
Transitional style between the Victorian style and the Modern Move-
ment, and it was, in this respect, compared with the Arts and Crafts in
England. But the Arts and Crafts were firmly based on the teachings of
Wiltiam Morris and thus fought for a sounder status for the artist and
a saner attitude to design. Art Nouveau is ourré and directs its appeal to

53. Gaudi: Parque Gueil, Barcelona. Begun in 1go0o.

TTT

the aesthete, the one who is ready to accept the dangerous tenet of art
for art’s sake. In this it is still emphatically nineteenth century, even if
the frenzy of its insistence on unprecedented form places it beyond that
century of historicism. A universally acceptable style could not issue
from its endeavours. Such a style was in the same years more humbly
and more securely prepared in England.

Thus it cannot be unexpected that Art Nouveau reached its highest
achievement in a country marginal to later nineteenth-century develop-
ments in art and architecture, and a country in which social conditions
had remained wholly unchallenged. Antoni Gaudi (1852-1926) worked
almost exclusively in and around Barcelona.” He started as a late and
highly personal Gothic Revivalist. Viollet-le-Duc’s Enzretiens were no
doubt known to him, but the nightmarish quality of such Gothicist
palaces as that of the bishop of Astorga (1887-95) is already entirely
Gaudi’s, and in decorative details such as the fearfully spiky gates of
the Casa Vicens at Barcelona of 1878-80 he is as original as Burges in
the contemporary details in his house in Melbury Road (PI. 39). Then -
an exact parallel to Mackmurdo and to no-one else in Europe - he turned
to bold and wilful curves in the entrance to the town house of his great
patron Eusebio Gill, a manufacturer and a man aware of recent English
developments.

Gaudi achieyed full liberation in 1898, and his first completely mature
masterpieces were begun in that year and in 1900, both for Giiell. It is
in the Colonia Giiell and its amazing, fascinating, horrible, and inimitable
church, Santa Coloma de Cervellé (P1.52) that walls are first set in
motion, windows appear in the seemingly most arbitrary positions and
the seemingly most arbitrary forms, that columns bend or stand out of
plumb, and that the craftsman is encouraged to leave work rough. The
Parque Giiell (Pl. 53) as a conception was based on those new English
ideas of garden suburbs and garden cities which will engage our
attention in another more normal context. Gaudi’s details of the lodges
with their minaret and their wildly heightened Orientalism everywhere,
of the parapets snaking up and down, the covered promenades of stone-
work as rough as in eighteenth-century sham ruins and of the Doric
columns placed out of true like wooden posts shoring up a wall, all

SOUR RITE ERK

peter eee een,
Gantt e mettoeny

Prim dds F297
SSS aa,
te ary

RT Gi vate me tT
Spt karim may.
matte

‘Transept, 1903-26,

$4. Gaudi: Sagrada Familia, Barcelona.

55. Gaudi: Sagrada Familia, Barcelona. Detail from the top of
one of the transept towers.

Ny Vie

56. Gaudi: Casa Batllé, Barcelona, 1905-7.

this goes in many ways beyond Western Art Nouveau, and yet can only
be understood within the terms of that short-lived style. Here is the
frantic desire for the unprecedented, here the faith in the creative
individual, here the delight in the arbitrary curve, and here the keen
interest in the possibilities of materials. Gaudi to avoid at all costs any
convention in the use of materials uses broken tiles and old cups and
saucers to face his parapet, and later on the same improbable materials
for the pinnacles of the Sagrada Familia.

The church of the Sagrada Familia had been begun in 1882. The
plans were in the accepted Gothic Revival. In 1884 Gaudi was put in
charge, and he first adhered and developed the conventional designs.
On the east facade of the transept (Pl. 54) one can follow from storey to
storey how his Gothic turned more and more original - in a way which
can be paralleled in some Arts and Crafts Gothic in England during the
same years (J.D. Sedding for instance and Carée) - and how after 1900
he abandoned Gothic altogether in favour of his own Art Nouveau. The
four sugar-loaf spires, Tunisian more than anything else, with their
amazing pattern of voids and solids and their even more amazing
crustaceous pinnacles are the lasting monument to Gaudi’s intrepid
daring (Pl. 55). .

That the faithful of Barcelona with whose money the church was
being built were ready to support so fantastic a design and so fantastic
a method of construction - for Gaudi was on the site all the time and
settled all details in personal talk with the workmen — is a reminder of
how remote from the conditions of London, Paris, or Brussels the
conditions were in which Gaudi could develop this intransigent brand
of Art Nouveau. Even more surprising is the fact that the same un-
compromising style was accepted for blocks of flats (Pls. §6 and $7).
Who would be ready to live in rooms of such curvy shapes, under roofs
like the backs of dinosaurs, behind walls bending and bulging so pre-
cariously and on balconies whose ironwork might stab at you any
moment? Who but an out-and-out aesthete or a compatriot of Gaudi
and Picasso?

Gaudi’s art indeed - a flowering of Art Nouveau long after saner
architects and designers had discarded it — is a link between that revolt
of the nineties and the Expressionism of the early collages, the Expres-
sionism of Picasso’s pottery, and some of the more outrageous innova-
tions of the architecture of 1950. Ronchamp has more in common with
the Sagrada Familia than with the style whose early development is the
theme of this book.

§7. Gaudi: Casa Mila, Barcelona, 1905-7.

5: Engineering and Architecture in the
Nineteenth Century

THE Modern Movement has not grown from one root. One of its
essential sources, it has been shown, is William Morris and the Arts and
Crafts; another was Art Nouveau. The works of the nineteenth-century
engineers are the third source of our present style, a source as potent 4s
the other two.!

Engineering architecture in the nineteenth century was largely baseri
on the development of iron, first as cast iron, then as wrought iron, later
as steel. Towards the end of the century reinforced concrete appears
as an alternative.

The history of iron as a material of more than auxiliary usefulness in
architecture begins when the inventiveness of the Industrial Revolution
had found out how iron could be produced industrially, that is after
1750." Attempts were soon made to replace timber or stone by iron. The
first case so far recorded is a freak: cast-iron columns supporting a
chimney at Alcobaca in Portugal. Their date is 1752. More structural
uses were developed in France in the 1770s and 1780s by Soufflot for
the staircase of the Louvre in 1779-81 and by Victor Louis in the theatre
at the Palais Royal in 1785-90. If Rinaldi in his Orlov Palace at St
Petersburg indeed used iron beams, that would point to precedents in
Italy or France not yet traced. Some early comparable cases in England
are the iron lantern over Soane’s Stock Office in the Bank of England
(1792), the iron beams of James Wyatt’s Palace at Kew (1801), Nash’s
iron and glass coving of the picture gallery at Attingham Park in
Shropshire (1810), and Foulston’s Theatre Royal at Plymouth (1811-14),
where wood was practically replaced by cast and wrought iron. On the
Continent Ludwig Catel had suggested as early as 1802 an iron roof

58. Benyon, Bage, & Marshal!’s flax-spinning mill, Ditherington, Shrewsbury,
1796.

for the projected National Theatre in Berlin, and in 1806 Napoleon had
wanted his Temple to the glory of the grande armée to be erected with-
out any wood, entirely of stone and iron. After 1820 there are more
cases than can be enumerated. In London Smirke’s British Museum has
in its earliest part, the King’s Library, iron roof beams dated 1824. The
iron beams in Wilkins’s University College, also in London, are of
1827-8. And as for churches, an iron roof went in above the stone vaults
of Southwark Cathedral, again in London, probably between 1822 and
1825, and at Chartres Cathedral in 1836-41.

In all these cases iron was chosen instead of wood for purely practical,
not for aesthetic reasons, The same is true of the architecturally much
more important development of iron framing in factories. The creative
brain here was William Strutt of Derby, cotton-spinner and partner for
a while with Richard Arkwright whose invention of the water-frame for

cue as

59. Lorillard: Building in Gold Street, New York, 1837.

spinning has been mentioned in Chapter 2. They built a six-storeyed
factory at Derby in 1792-3 which had exposed iron columns, This
building does not exist any longer; but inside a warehouse of Strutt’s at
Milford in Derbyshire, the so-called Cruciform Building, erected in
1793, cast-iron columns are present, supporting timber beams. The
same is true of Strutt and Arkwright’s West Mill at Belper, built in
1793-5. This is again of six storeys. The next and decisive step was

oo
Vie Be a

60. Bogardus: Building for Harper Bros, New York, 1854.

taken by another manufacturer. Messrs Benyon, Bage, & Marshall built
their flax-spinning mill at Ditherington just outside Shrewsbury in
1796 (P1.58). This also is happily still in existence, It is five storeys high,
with brick walls, and has inside cast-iron supports throughout, that is
not only cast-iron columns but also cast-iron beams. Timber is entirely
avoided ~ obviously a tremendous advantage in a factory. The new idea
caught on at once. Boulton and Watt designed a seven-storeyed cotton
mill for Philips & Lee at Salford near Manchester in 1799, Benyon &
Bage built another flax-spinning mill at Leeds in 1803, and Strutt built
more mills at Belper and Milford in 1803 and thereafter. When P.C.W.
von Beuth, the Prussian Minister of Commerce travelled in England in
1823, he saw plenty of factories of eight and nine storeys, with paper-
thin walls, iron columns, and iron beams;* and when Schinkel travelled
in England in 1826 he drew them.!

However, as long as these members of iron remained inside they
could make little difference to the consciousness of so fagade-minded
a generation of architects as that of the mid nineteenth century. The
admission of iron to the front of utilitarian buildings was due to
America, At Pottsville, Pennsylvania, the Farmers’ and Miners’ Bank
of 1829-30 has a cast-iron facade in imitation of marble. The architect
was John Haviland.> A warehouse in Gold Street, downtown in New
York, which was built in 1837 (Pl. 59), has cast-iron piers and cast-iron
lintels. The style here is also still classical. There is then a gap in our
evidence, but a passage in Gottfried Semper’s Wissenschaft, Industrie
und Kunst® written late in 1851 refers to the report of a German engineer
on building in New York and mentions as a usual thing ‘a whole front
of richly ornamented cast iron’ stuccoed all over. So such buildings
must have existed in 1850. They cannot have been very prominent,
however, for otherwise James Bogardus could not have got away with
his attitude of the inventor or at least the innovator, when he brought
out his pamphlet on Cast Iron Buildings in 1856. He had erected a
building with an exposed cast-iron frame already in 1854 for Harper
Bros in New York’ (PI.60). By the mid fifties Britain was certainly as
fully aware as New York of the architectural possibilities of cast iron
for commercial purposes. An example is the Jamaica Street warehouse
in Glasgow of 1855-6 (P1.61); another and far more spectacular one is
Oriel Chambers at Liverpool, which was designed by Peter Ellis and
built in 1864-5.5 The delicacy of the ironwork in the plate-glass oriel
windows and the curtain walling at the back with the vertical supports
retracted yet visible from outside is almost unbelievably ahead of its
time. Of London, George Aitchison, an architect, himself busy design-
ing commercial buildings, could say in 1864 that ‘one rarely sees a
large building being erected without iron columns and iron girders’.®

What still remained of decorative details in the facades kept in touch
with the Italianate or Gothic fashion of the day. But at the back, where
nothing needed to be done for show, an absence of all ‘motifs’ occurs
sometimes which is surprisingly akin to twentieth-century detailing
(Pl. 62). The same is true to an even more astounding degree in a large,
purely utilitarian building recently discovered by Mr Eric de Maré.?°

63. G. T. Greene: Boat store at Sheerness Naval Dockyard, 1858-61.

It is a boat store at the Sheerness Naval Dockyard (P1.63) and was
designed in 1858 by Col G. T. Greene, Director of Engineering and
Architectural Works to the Admiralty. It was built in 1859-61. It is
210 feet long and 135 feet wide and exhibits an entirely uncompromising
four-storeyed iron framework with bands of low windows and sill-
panels of corrugated iron. While technically the novelty of all these
buildings was their extensive use of iron, aesthetically their most notable
quality is their equally extensive and completely even use of glass. Much
glass was useful for high town buildings anyway; the designers of the
timber-framed town houses of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
had known that. Many of these houses have facades in which, except for
wooden mullions, wooden bressummers, and sill-panels, all is glass. The
effect could be obtained with stone as well as iron, and there are indeed
in America all-glass facades with stone mullions before they appeared
with iron. The most amazing of them is the Jayne Building, Philadelphia,
of 1849-50. This was designed by W’. J. Johnston and Thomas U. Walter,
the architect of Gerard College and the iron dome of the Capitol,
and a man with engineering interests and experience. The building

64. Johnston and Walter: Jayne Building,
Philadelphia, 1849-50.

is eight storeys high and the Gothic stonework is of granite (P1.64).!!
There was indeed no basic difference between the stone and glass
front and the iron and glass front as long as the technique was not
evolved which became that of the twentieth century, namely the carry-
ing of the masonry or brick panels of the walls on the members of the
iron skeleton. This may be the case at Oriel Chambers, In any case it
was exactly contemporarily done in a shot tower in New York built
about 1860-65, and a grain elevator in Brooklyn. These were, we are
told,!‘ constructed as a cast-iron framework filled in with a light wall of
brick, the iron showing on the outside’.!” In France the warehouses of
the St Ouen Docks in Paris by Préfontaine and Fontaine, discussed in
the Builder in 1865, were also apparently iron frame with brick used
only to fill in,!* and so was the Chocolat Menier Factory of 1871-2 at
Noisiel-sur-Marne by Saulnier.'* The source in this case was Viollet-
le-Duc, and to his Entretiens we must refer again in a later context.
The buildings so far presented are interesting enough, but it can
hardly be maintained that iron in them was regarded as an aesthetic
asset. It is hard to decide when this positive attitude first appeared, that

wa

is, when designers began to like the look of iron structures, One is in-
clined to say in iron bridges, because to us their resilience and elegance,
made possible only by the use of iron, are aesthetically so irresistible.
This applies, to a certain degree, even to the earliest all-iron bridge ever
designed, the one built by the great iron-master Abraham Darby in
1779 across the river Severn at Coalbrookdale (PI. 65). Who designed
the bridge cannot be said with certainty. The idea seems to have been
partly John Wilkinson’s, the other great iron-master of the same district,
and partly an architect’s: Thomas Farnoll Pritchard (1723-77).
Pritchard’s design of 1775 (Pl. 66), is indeed bolder than that finally
adopted after his death in 1777. The executed design is probably Abra-
ham Darby’s, but the credit for the bold idea seems more likely to be
Pritchard’s and Wilkinson’s.'> Bolder in design and even more sparing
of materials was the successor of the Coalbrookdale Bridge, the bridge
at Sunderland, built between 1793 and 1796, designed, it seems, by
Rowland Burdon, though Tom Paine may also have had something to
do with it. Paine, while in America, had taken out a patent for iron
bridges in England in 1788. The Sunderland Bridge was carried out by
Walker’s of Rotherham and Burdon. It has unfortunately been taken
down, It had a span of 296 feet as against the 100 feet of Coalbrookdale.
Five years after its completion, Thomas Telford suggested replacing
London Bridge with a cast-iron structure to be thrown across the river
in one sleck sweep of 600 feet (Pl. 67°.

Parallel with this development of the arched bridge runs that of the
suspension bridge. The Chinese had known bridges suspended from
iron chains, and they were illustrated in Europe as early as in Kircher’s
China... illustrata of 1667 and in Fischer von Etlach’s Historical
Architecture of 1726.'" This book was translated into English in 1730,
and about ten or twelve years later a bridge which made use of this
Chinese principle was built across the river Tees in North England, two
miles above Middleton. It was 70 feet long, but little more than 2 feet
wide and chiefly crossed by miners on their way to work. The gangway
was, we are told in 1794, unpleasantly restless and ‘few strangers dare
trust themselves’ on it. After this the problem of the suspension bridge
seems to have been left in abeyance for sixty years, until James Finley

whe as!

66 Pritchard: Design for the Coalbrookdale Bridge, 1775.

67. Telford: Design for a cast-iron bridge to replace London Bridge, 1801.

(who died in 1828) made a fresh start in America, His bridge across
Jacob’s Creek between Uniontown and Greenburgh had about the
same length as its English predecessor and dates from 1801. Finley took
out a patent for suspension bridges in the same year and built eight
more between that year and 1811. The longest of them crossed the
cataracts of the Schuylkill and had a span of 306 feet.!”

When England reappeared in the story of the suspension bridge, with
Telford’s design of 1815 for the Menai Bridge, he no doubt knew of
these American developments.!* The Menai Bridge has a main span of
579 feet and two side spans of 260 feet each and is admirably clean in
appearance. Telford was followed by Captain Samuel Brown who had
taken a patent for chain bridges as early as 1817. His Union Bridge at
Berwick-on-Tweed was built in 1819-20 with a main span of 449 feet.
The Brighton Chain Pier followed in 1822-3 and then many others in
England and on the Continent.

The most impressive of all is probably the Clifton Suspension Bridge
at Bristol (PI.68), designed in 1829-31 by Isambard Kingdom Brunel
(1806-59) and begun in 1836.!* It seems hardly admissible that the
beauty of such a structure should be purely accidental, that is the out-
come of nothing but intelligent engineering. Surely, a man like Brunel
must have been susceptible to the unprecedented aesthetic qualities of
his design - an architecture without weight, the age-old contrast of
passive resistance and active will neutralized, pure functional energy
swinging out in a glorious curve to conquer the 700 feet between the
two banks of the deep valley. Not one word too much is said, not one
compromising form introduced. Even the pylons are entirely unadorned,
admittedly against Brunel’s original wish which was for Neo-Egyptian
decoration. As they happen to be, they form a superb counterpoise to
the transparency of the iron construction. Only once before had such
daring spirit ruled European architecture, at the time when Amiens,
Beauvais, and Cologne were built.

Brunel may not have thought of his designs in such terms, or in terms
of art at all, and at that stage that was perhaps ail to the good. The iron-
masters certainly had ambitions of an artistic kind, and as soon as this
aiming at art became a conscious effort, the results were less convincing.

68. Brunel: Clifton Suspension Bridge, Bristol. Designed 1829-31. Begun in
1836.

This is true of John Wilkinson’s cast-iron pulpit of about 1790 at
Bradley in Staffordshire and also of the obelisk which is his own proud
funeral monument at Lindale near Grange-over-Sands (1808),°" and
of that cast-iron tracery of the later eighteenth and the early nineteenth
century which appears in the churches of Shropshire and the surround-
ing counties, not too far from the Severn Valley iron-works ‘Pl. 69).
Where iron columns occur in churches and public buildings, on the
other hand, it can as a rule be said that the material was chosen for
practical and not for visual reasons. Here once more England was
leading. At St Anne in Liverpool, a church built in 177¢-72 and no
longer extant, the gallerics were carried on cast-iron columns. The same
is true of Lightcliffe in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where the date
is 1774-5 and the style comes close to John Carr’s.*! At St Chad in
Shrewsbury by George Steuart, on the other hand, the two orders of
slim columns are still encased in timber. The church is dated 1790-92.7*
Unconcealed iron appeared on a smaller scale to support galleries of
theatres as well as churches. The carliest theatre recorded is Smirke’s
Covent Garden Theatre in London of 1808-9. Vhe earliest churches

69. St Alkmund, Shrewsbury, 1795.
Cast-iron tracery.

seem to be connected with yet another fanatical iron-master, John Cragg
of Liverpool, who induced young Thomas Rickman to make extensive
use of iron at Everton Parish Church near Liverpool in 1813-14 and
at St Michael Toxteth in 1814.78

A few years later as distinguished an architect as Sir John Soane
recommended it in his Memorandum to the Church Commissioners
of 1818,24 but it was to be used without disguise only for smaller
churches. John Nash has it quite often, but as a rule also in such a way
that the public should take it for stone. Thus the Doric columns of
Carlton House Terrace (begun in 1827) facing St James’s Park in
London are of cast iron, and so were those of the Regent Street Quadrant
(begun in 1818).

70. Loudon: Designs for conservatories, 1817.

However, there is at least one case in which Nash seems to have
treated iron deliberately as sron and enjoyed the elegance which it can
give to a support. This was in his famous extravaganza, the Pavilion at
Brighton, where the main staircase is entirely of iron, and in the kitchen
thin iron shafts support the ceiling. At the top copper palm leaves
sprout out of them. That was in 1815 and 1818-21, respectively, im-
portant dates, since so far as we can see, they mark the first appearance
of unmasked iron in connexion with royalty.

The bulbous dome of the Pavilion also has a framework of bent iron
girders. The earliest example of metal with glass in a dome, however,
was the Halles au Blé in Paris, designed in 1809 and built in 1811, This
achieved an even daylight inside the building, which could not otherwise

TA

be obtained, At the same -time the designers of conservatories began to
realize the advantages of glass vaults. Here glass roofs had already been
made use of since the beginning of the eighteenth century. The idea of
‘curvilinear’ roofs appears for the first time in a paper read to the
Horticultural Society in London by Sir G.S. Mackenzie in 1815. It was
at once taken up by the horticulturist T. A. Knight of Downton Castle
in Shropshire, brother of the more famous Richard Payne Knight, and
by the gardener and journalist Loudon. It was Loudon who in 1817 and
1818 suggested the shapes which then became usual (Pl. 70). By 1830
there existed in England quite a number of large hothouses with curved
roofs or domes, such as the circular conservatory at Bretton Hall in
Yorkshire, which was 100 feet in diameter and 60 feet high.” So the
importance of the Paris Jardin des Plantes has been rather overestimated.
This was followed by the Chatsworth Conservatory which Joseph
Paxton (1801-65) built for the Duke of Devonshire in 1837-40 and
which was 277 feet long, 132 feet wide, and 67 feet high.

With it the stage was set for the Crystal Palace of 1851, home of the
first international exhibition ever held, and as assertive a profession of
faith in iron as the largest of the suspension bridges. But before it is
reached, a few other developments must for a moment be taken into
consideration. Iron and glass have obvious advantages also for market
halls and railway stations, two types of building which the fabulous
growth of populations in the cities of the early nineteenth century and
the fast-growing interchange of materials and products between
factories and cities brought to the fore. The Market Hall by the Made-
leine in Paris was of an elementary iron and glass construction as early
as 1824. It was not vaulted, but in 1845 Hector Horeau suggested, for
the rebuilding of the Central Market Hall in Paris, a glass vault of
300 foot span.** That would have reached the span of the widest railway
shed ever built, the shed of the Broad Street Station at Philadelphia of
1893," and surpassed any which the English railway companies, leading
in iron construction up to the eighties, had actually built, namely that
of New Street, Birmingham, in 1854 by Cowper, which was 212 feet
and then that of St Pancras, London, by W. H. Barlow, of 1863-5, which
was 234 feet. The Market Hall in Paris as carried out by Baltard &

Callet in 1852-9 is also of glass and iron but not vaulted and of no
special merit.

In the Crystal Palace the vaults are not the determining factor either.
What makes Paxton’s building the outstanding example of mid-
nineteenth-century iron and glass architecture was rather its enormous
size - 1851 feet long, that is, much longer than the palace of Versailles
~ the absence of any other materials, and the use of an ingenious system
of prefabrication for the iron and glass parts, based on a twenty-four-
foot grid adopted throughout, Only by means of prefabrication could
a building of such size be erected in the miraculously short time of six-
teen weeks. It is likely that even Paxton, the outsider, would not
have dared such an unprecedented procedure and such an unprece-
dented design, if he had not worked for a temporary building, However,
the fact that the Crystal Palace was re-erected in 1854 at Sydenham
near London for a more permanent purpose proves that the new beauty
of metal and glass had caught the fancy of progressive Victorians and of
the public at large. In architectural iiterature there raged a fierce contro-
versy. Pugin, Gothicist and fanatical Catholic that he was, of course
hated it. He called it the ‘Crystal Humbug’ and the ‘Glass Monster’,
“a bad vile construction’ and ‘the most monstrous thing ever imagined’. °8
Ruskin, following Pugin here as in so many other things, called it ‘a
greenhouse larger than greenhouse was ever built before’ and the final
proof that higher beauty was ‘eternally impossible’ in iron,** In fact he
had already in 1849 placed at the very start of his Seven Lamps of
Architecture a definition which ‘separates architecture from a wasp’s
nest, a rat hole, or a railway station’, The opposition against this negative
and reactionary attitude came from the circle of Henry Cole who as
reformers of design were in some other ways so close to Ruskin. The
voice of the circle in matters of iron architecture was Matthew Digby
Wyatt, an inferior architect when compared with Pugin, an inferior
writer when compared with Ruskin, but a highly intelligent critic. He
wrote in the Journal of Design in 1851:*" ‘It has become difficult to
decide where civil engineering ends and architecture begins.” The new
iron bridges are amongst the ‘wonders of the world’. ‘From such be-
ginnings,’ he continued, ‘what glories may be in reserve, when England

has systematized a scale of form and proportion . . . we may trust our-
selves to dream, but we dare not predict. Whatever the result may be,
it is impossible to disregard the fact that the building for the Exhibition
of 1851 is likely to accelerate the “consummation devoutly to be
wished” and that the novelty of its form and details will be likely to
exercise a powerful influence upon national taste.’

Here more than anywhere one may feel inclined to allow the Cole
circle a seat among the pioneers of twentieth-century design, and one
must make oneself remember how distressingly Wyatt’s performance
differs from his theory, to send him back to the mid nineteenth century
to which he belongs. Another somewhat similar case is that of Thomas
Harris who built in the wildest, most nightmarish High Victorian style,
yet wrote in 1862 that in the Crystal Palace ‘a new style of architecture,
as remarkable as any of its predecessors, may be considered to have
been inaugurated’ and that ‘iron and glass have succeeded in giving a
distinct and marked character to the future practice of architecture’.*?
Even Ruskin, before he had seen the Crystal Palace, had in 1849 sug-
gested that the time may be near ‘when a new system of architectural
laws will be developed, adapted entirely to metallic construction’.3?
The most successful of High Victorian architects, Sir George Gilbert
Scott, was also too intelligent to overlook the potentialities of iron in
architecture, even if he was far too conventional to explore them him-
self. This is what he wrote of bridges in 1858: ‘It is self-evident that
this triumph of modern metallic construction opens out a perfectly new
field for architectural development’ and ‘it would puzzle the most
ingenious bungler to render [suspension-bridges] unpleasing’. But as
soon as it came to building, he was ready to grant iron only ‘as an
exceptional expedient’ in such cases as the Crystal Palace.*3

The railway station was the field where architecture and engineering
met. Nothing could characterize the situation more poignantly than
Scott’s towering and towered Gothic brick and granite palace in front
of Barlow’s splendid train shed at St Pancras, The exact parallel to this
is James Fergusson writing in his History of the Modern Styles of
Architecture in 1862 that the Gare de Est in Paris was superior to
King’s Cross Station in London, because ‘from its higher degree of

ornamentation . . . it becomes really an object of Architectural Art’.#4
There one is back where this book started, at the definition of archi-
tecture as decoration of construction. All the more remarkable are those
who wholeheartedly hailed railway architecture. ‘Stations are the
cathedrals of our century’ said an anonymous author in the Building
News in 1875,*° and a full twenty-five years earlier, that is before the
Crystal Palace, Théophile Gautier of all people wrote this: ‘Mankind

will produce a completely new kind of architecture ... at the moment
when the new methods created by . . . industry are made use of. The

application of iron allows and enforces the use of many new forms, as
can be seen in railway stations, suspension bridges, and the arches of
conservatories.’** A strange remark to come from the poet of ?art pour
Part, It shows the complete confusion between social and aesthetic
considerations which characterizes art criticism about the middle of the
Nineteenth century. Was Gautier perhaps less moved by faith in the
industrial age than by delight in the forms of engineering structures and
machinery, a delight such as is found also in Turner’s Rain, Steam and
Speed, Monet’s Gare St Lazare, or Menzel’s Rolling Mill?

So far all our testimonies on iron have been stimulated by structures
which were not architecture with a capital Av When it comes to civic
buildings or churches, the field of those ready to use iron frankly and
with aesthetic conviction narrow’s at once considerably. The two most
noteworthy buildings of the 184os, that is of the decade before the
Crystal Palace, are Labrouste’s Biblioth¢que Ste Genevieve in Paris of
1843-50 and Bunning’s Coal Exchange in London of 1847-9. Labrouste’s
Library has a restrained Neo-Renaissance exterior and a two-naved,
arched, and tunnel-vaulted interior where the extremely slender shafts
separating the two naves are of exposed iron and the two vaults rest on
traceried iron arches connecting the shafts with the outer stone walls,
The London Coal Exchange is equally free in the exposure of iron,
though very much freer in the display of busy ornament. In the fifties,
the Oxford Museum built by Deane & Woodward under the immediate
supervision of Ruskin and with his full blessing, has tall iron columns
and much iron decoration in Gothic and naturalistic forms. In the same
fifties, in Paris Louis-Auguste Boileau had the temerity to introduce at


i
i
i

71. Boileau: St Eugene, Paris, 1854-5.

St Eugéne not only iron columns but also iron vaulting-ribs (Pl.71;
1854-5). He and his son Louis-Charles did the same in the sixties in
other churches™ and Louis-Auguste wrote several books on the advan-
tages of iron in architecture. Baltard, the architect of the Market Hall,
joined the Boileaus at St Augustin in Paris in 1860-61 and used iron
piers, iron arches, and an iron dome.

This is when Viollet-le-Duc appeared on the scene, a character as
ambiguous and as influential as Pugin had been. He was the successful
and ruthless restorer of more cathedrals than can be counted, of
Carcassonne and of Pierrefonds. He was a radical politician and a
learned architectural historian. His Dictionnaire has remained a source

72. Viollet-le-Duc: Hlustration from the
Entretiens, 1872.

of information and an object of study to the present day. He was the
expounder of the principle of Gothic construction with as much con-
viction as and far better scholarship than Pugin. He was the defender
of the Gothic thirteenth century as a century of the people, and on top
of all this a passionate defender of iron in architecture, iron for supports,
and iron for vaults, The book to go to for Viollet-le-Duc’s views on
iron is his Entretiens. In the first volume (1863) there is in Lecture 1X
a general reminder that ‘in the present day we have immense resources
furnished by manufacturing skill’, and a plea for ‘making use of these
means with a view to the adoption of architectural forms adapted to our
times’, instead of disguising ‘these novel appliances by an architecture

73. Dutert and Contamin: Halle des Machines, Paris International Exhibition,
1889.

borrowed from other ages’, and in Lecture X one reference to the
use of iron for the building of an assembly hall for 2000 people.*®
In Volume II (1872), there is far more: a consistent proposal for ‘the
simultaneous employment of metal and masonry’ with masonry walls
and undisguised supports of iron and vaulting-ribs of iron, an appraisal
of the ‘feats of construction which iron would allow and of the innova-
tions of the engineers’,?% and illustrations showing precisely what
Viollet had in his mind, heavy Victorian structures with heavy and
floridly decorated iron members (P1.72).

More than this could indeed not be expected from any architect of
the sixties and seventies. The complete abandonment of borrowed
architectural elements and ideals could not come from the architects,
It came from the engineers. The next decades were their years of ulti-
mate triumph. Bridges achieved unprecedented spans, the Brooklyn
Bridge of 187¢-83 with its main span of 1596 feet and the Firth of Forth

74. Eiffel: Eiffel Tower, Paris, 1889.

Bridge of 1883-9 with its 1735-foot span. Vaulting achieved the mir-
aculous span of 385 feet in the Halle des Machines at the Paris Inter-
national Exhibition of 1889, by the engineer Contamin and the architect
Dutert (P1.73). It had a height of 150 feet and must have conveyed an
unprecedented feeling of space and weightlessness. The illustration
shows the fascinating ease with which the steel arms spring from the
supporting shafts. The pairs of arms are not joined together at the top
of the vault; they just touch each other by means of the same narrow
bolts used at the bottom of the shafts. For the same exhibition where
the widest span ever was thus accomplished, Gustave Eiffel built the
highest structure ever erected, the Eiffel Tower (Pl. 74). Eiffel (1832-
1923)! had already tried out the construction of those sickle-shaped
girders that form the base of the tower, in several bridges which are
among the boldest of the century, for instance the Douro Bridge (1875)
and the Garabit Viaduct (1879). The overwhelming effect of the Eiffel
Tower is due to the height of 1000 feet - unsurpassed until after the
First World War — and also the elegance of its curved outline, and the
powerful yet controlled energy of its élan.

The Eiffel Tower was still constructed of wrought iron but by 1885-
go steel had begun to take the place of iron. Hence it ought to be
realized that, from 1890 onwards, the most advanced architectural
thought and the visual qualities of progressive buildings can no longer
be fully understood without taking steel into consideration, and steel
at this moment meant more than anything the skyscraper. Not every
tall building is a skyscraper. We use the term only for buildings where
load-bearing walls arc replaced by skeleton construction. Recent
research has established with great precision the various stages which
led from the one to the other.*! They do not concern us here in detail.

All that need be said of the prehistory of the skyscraper is that tall
office buildings were not possible before the advent of the lift (1852)
and more particularly the electric lift (invented by W.von Siemens in
1880), A height of 349 feet was reached, in spite of solid masonry walls,
by the Pulitzer Building in New York in 1888-9, Meanwhile, however,
the Home Insurance Building in Chicago by William Le Baron Jenney
(1832-1907) had been erected in 1884-5 with a genuine skeleton

75. Sullivan: Wainwright Building, St Louis, 1890-91.

construction, and other Chicago office blocks such as the Tacoma
Building of 1887-8 by Holabird and Roche improved Jenney’s
innovation at once.'? But in their appearance neither the Home
Insurance nor the Tacoma Building nor the other earliest Chicago
skyscrapers show features in advance of the customary masonry towers
put up before. It was left to Sullivan to pay attention to the voice of
steel, The result is the Wainwright Building in St Louis (P1.75), a mile-
stone in the evolution of the Modern Movement. It was designed in

1890. Mr Morrison has pointed out rightly that its fagades do not by
any means show its construction in its entirety. The masonry strips at
the corners are still wider than the other uprights, which are of the
same width, although only every second of them corresponds to a steel
stanchion. The top storey with its bull’s-eyes, and the far projecting top
cornice with its lush Sullivanian Art Nouveau decoration, also are
reminiscent of stone traditions. Yet Sullivan had understood that the
grid of steel calls for an exterior essentially based on one and the same
unit, or, as he puts it, that we must ‘take our cue from the individual
cell, which requires a window with its separating pier, its sili and lintel,
and without more ado, make them all look alike, because they all are
alike’.*? Hence the splendid simplicity of rhythm and the unfaltering
directness of effect. In contrast to van de Velde, Sullivan thus translated
into the reality of big buildings those revolutionary theories of his
which we have discussed at the beginning of this book.

Nor was he the only architect in Chicago to have such a strong feeling
for the character of the coming century. It appeared in Richardson
when he was faced with the job of designing the Marshall Field Whole-
sale Building in 1885, a massive block, not a skyscraper at all, but a
monument to commerce and industry erected regardless of all the para-
phernalia traditionally connected with monumentality. Its round arches
are the only allusion to the architect’s Neo-Romanesque past. The
spirit is wholly original, and must have impressed enormously not only
Sullivan but also Burnham and Root, when they built the Monadnock
Block in 1890-91 (PI.76). This building has neither any Richardsonian
forms nor does it make use of a steel skeleton. It is the last of the big
masonry towers, yet in its uncompromising refusal to mitigate its sheer
lines by any mouldings and any ornament, it is entirely of the new age.
To that extent can technique and aesthetics be at variance at any one
moment even in so consistent a development as that of the Chicago
school. #4

In the cellars of the Monadnock Block and other American office
buildings ferro-concrete was used, and although it was not used in any
but a utilitarian and hidden way, it must at this juncture be introduced
formally, as it was to become one of the most significant materials of

4 a tS, ae
76. Burnham and Root: Monadnock Block,
Chicago, 1890-91.

the twentieth century. Its prehistory has recently been elucidated very
fully,*® and so the story can be summarized easily. There are first of all
the differences between cement and concrete - concrete being an
aggregate — and between mass concrete and reinforced concrete ~ the

iron or steel reinforcements adding to the compression strength of
concrete the tensile strength of iron.

Concrete had been widely used by the Romans and was indeed their
distinguishing building teclinique from the first century A.D. onwards.

The material was then lost and appears again only in the French building
manuals of about 1800, such as Rondelet’s Art de bdtir. Propaganda for
cisterns, grain clevators, and whole houses to be made of mass concrete
started soon, and in both France and England concrete hauses can be
traced back to the 1830s. The first concrete fanatic in history, a type to
multiply rapidly, was Francois Coignet who wrote at the time of the
International Exhibition of 1855: ‘Cement, concrete, and iron are
destined to replace stone,’#* and built the shell of the church of Le
Vésinet of concrete. Its interior was of iron.*”

The beginnings of the iron reinforcement of cement go back to a
note in Loudon’s Encvelopaedia of Cottage, Farm, and Villa Architecture
of 1832,38 where cement floors with an embedded lattice work of iron
ribs are mentioned, and to a patent of 1844 for cement floors with
embedded cast-iron joists. In the 1850s more patents followed, an
English one of 1854 referring explicitly to the iron or wire-rope inside
the concrete as being in a state of tension'® and a French one of Coignet’s
of 1856 speaking equally explicitly of the iron members as ‘iirants’ 5°
The next name after Coignet’s which must be remembered is that of
Joseph Monier who perfected flower-pots of reinforced concrete in
1867 and columns and beams of reinforced concrete in 1877. Con-
currently progress was made in England in shuttering for the pouring
of concrete. Norman Shaw’s name comes into the history of concrete
too, although only very marginally; for the designs for partly concrete
cottages which he brought out in 1878 are of mass concrete not of
reinforced concrete.

Reinforced concrete emerged to maturity in the same seventies, when
William E. Ward and Thaddeus Hyatt began to analyse and calculate
the properties of concrete and iron in their combination. A few years
later the Germans, impressed by Monier’s experiments, followed suit,
and the names of G.A.Wayss and Koenen, as manufacturer and
engineer respectively, mark the start of concrete making and concrete
scholarship in the modern sense. They take us to the mid eighties.

Finally their scientific endeavours were paralleled and reinforced by
the ingenuity and the showmanship of a great French enthusiast,
Francois Hennebique. It was Hennebique who replaced iron by steel

77. De Baudot: St Jean de Montmartre, Paris, 1894-9.

and introduced the bending of the steel reinforcements near the supports,
His first patents date from 1892 and 1893, and his firm soon became
extremely prosperous. A spinning mill at Tourcoing by Hennebique
which was built in 1895 has as uncompromisingly functional a fagade
of exposed concrete framing with large glass surfaces between as any of
the buildings of the Chicago architects.

Two years later concrete graduated, The date is that of Anatole de
Baudot’s church of St Jean de Montmartre (P1.77). Baudot was a pupil
of Viollet-le-Duc, He shared his master’s faith in new materials and
their applicability to monumental tasks. If Viollet-le-Duc had suggested
the use of iron for reinterpreting Gothic principles, Baudot used
concrete for the same purpose. The bareness and sheerness of the sup-
ports, the unmitigated scaffolding effect of the concrete beams passing
forward and backward and across, and the glazing of pendentives and
lantern achieve an austere directness which Baudot considered funda-
mentally Gothic, but which at the same time heralds the spatial intri-
cacies of Mackintosh and Le Corbusier. Between the completion of this
building and the First World War, France remained the leader of the
development of concrete architecture.

One more remark is necessary before this account of engineering
architecture can be closed. Ruskin, Morris, and their followers hated
the machine and consequently the new steel and glass architecture,
which, according to Ruskin, is ‘eternally separated from all good and
great things by a gulf which not all the tubular bridges nor engineering
of ten thousand nineteenth centuries cast into one great bronze-
foreheaded century, will ever over-pass one inch of”.*!

Ruskin’s reasons for this frantic scorn were of a primarily aesthetic
nature, those of Morris were entirely social. Morris was unable to
appreciate the positive possibilities of the new materials, because he
was too intensely concerned with the negative consequences of the
Industrial Revolution. He saw only what had been destroyed: crafts-
manship and pleasurable work. But no new period in human civilization
has ever arisen without an initial phase in which a complete upheaval
of values took place; and such phases are not specially pleasant for
contemporaries.

ny

\

The engineers, on the other hand, were too absorbed in their thrilling
discoveries to notice the social discontent accumulating around them,
and to listen to Morris’s warning voice. Owing to this antagonism, the
two most important tendencies in nineteenth-century art and archi-
tecture could not join forces. The Arts and Crafts kept their retro-
spective attitude, the engineers their indifference to art as such.

The precipitate turned out to be Art Nouveau. So fascinated were
the designers of Art Nouveau by any novelty, any demonstration against
the traditional and conventional that they could take the innovations
of the engineers in their stride. They were as much convinced of the
necessity for devoted work in the crafts as Morris and his disciples, but
they were also capable of achieving an occasional synthesis between the
new sensitivity and the new material.

So it is essential ultimately to understand the style of the twentieth
century as a synthesis of the Morris Movement, the development of
steel building, and Art Nouveau, The account of these three principal
lines of progress, which has been given in this and the preceding
chapters, will now enable us to devote the remaining pages of this book
to the Modern Movement itself, as it grew in England, the United
States, and on the Continent.

6 - England, Eighteen-ninety to
Nineteen-fourteen

WE must first return to English architecture and design. At the end of
the eighties, as was shown, Morris was the leader in design, Norman
Shaw in architecture. The deliberate break with tradition, which
characterized the style of Europe’s greatest painters about 1890 and the
style of the initiators of Art Nouveau, was not made and not desired in
England. So it seemed appropriate to leave until now the discussion of
the English development from 1890 onwards, though at least one
English architect had ventured on a new style of an original and highly
stimulating nature, before Art Nouveau had begun. This was C.F.
Annesley Voysey (1857-1941).! It has already been said that his designs
were a source of inspiration of Art Nouveau. Van de Velde told the
author of the revolutionizing effect of Voysey’s wallpapers on him and
his friends.* His words were: ‘It was as if Spring had come all of a
sudden.’ And indeed we have only to look at one of Voysey’s wallpapers
printed in the nineties (P1.78) and one of his somewhat later printed
linens (Pl. 79), to see the great difference between him and Morris. Not
that he aimed at novelty; his modifications and progressiveness, it
would seem, were almost unconscious. Doctrines and hard-and-fast
rules were not his way. In the controversy between supporters of
stylized and of naturalistic ornament, he did not take sides. For although,
in an interview in 1893, he declared realism to be unsuitable for decora~
tion, he was inclined to admit plants and beasts in patterns on condition
that they be ‘reduced to mere symbols’. This may seem in accord with
Morris, but there is a distinctly new note in Voysey’s urgent desire to
‘live and work in the present’.?

So he arrives at patterns which are happily near to nature, and at the

78. Voysey: Design for a wallpaper, c. 1895.

79. Voysey: Stags and Trees, printed linen, 1908.

same time full of decorative charm. The graceful shapes of birds flying,
drifting, or resting, and of tree-tops, with or without leaves, are favourite
motifs of Voysey’s, and there is an unmistakable kindliness in his child-
like stylized trees and affectionately portrayed birds and beasts, A
comparison between these wallpapers or linens and Morris’s Honeysuckle
(P1,8) shows what a decisive step has been taken away from nineteenth-
century Historicism into a new world of light and youth,

Tt is Known that everywhere in English cultural life a longing for
fresh air and gaiety expressed itself at the end of Queen Victoria’s reign.
The success of Liberty’s about 1890 depended largely on their Eastern
silks in delicate shades and their other Chinese imports. The history of
the part played by China and Japan in European art since 1860 has not
yet been written. It would be very interesting to show the influence of
the East appearing here in a loose technique of painting, there in the
greatest finesse of line and contours, there again in clear, soft, and pure
colour, and in yet other works in flat pattern effects. Owing to the
unique synthesis of ornamental and ‘Impressionist’ qualities in Eastern
art, both the Impressionists and, at the opposite pole, the originators
of Art Nouveau, could use what Japanese woodcuts and Chinese pottery
had to teach them. The Impressionist went to Japan for a lightness that
he took for plein air, for a sketchy handling of the brush, and a flatness
of surfaces, which he wrongly interpreted as meaning the shadelessness
of strong sunlight. His adversary, more justly, stressed the high degree
of stylization in every line drawn and every surface decorated by an
Eastern artist. That is why Japanese woodcuts can appear in the back-
grounds of Manet’s Zola and Degas’s Tissot as well as van Gogh’s Pére
Tanguy and Ensor’s Skeleton Studying Eastern Paintings.’ The case of
Whistler is especially instructive; for it proves that in the same painter
at the same time both aspects of the Eastern style might be reflected.
The influence of Eastern colour, Eastern delicacy, and Eastern com-
position on his yet so clearly Impressionist portraits is evident and has
no need of the Chinese costume in the Princesse du Pays de la Porcelaine
to stress it, At the same time, however, Whistler could make this same
picture the chief accent of a room decorated in a style which, although
not free from traces of Historicism obviously pointed forward to Art

Nouveau.® Moreover Whistler pleaded for rooms with completely plain
walls in light colours. In this he followed a lead given by his friend
Edward Godwin whose house at Bristol has been mentioned in a pre-
vious chapter because of the plain walls and bare floors of its rooms and

. because of its Japanese prints. The date of these interiors, 1862, is
remarkably early. Whistler’s house in Tite Street, Chelsea, built for
him by Godwin, had white and rich yellow walls, Japanese matting on
the floors, plain curtains in straight folds, some pieces of Chinese
porcelain, and a few simply framed pictures and etchings.” In trying to
imagine such rooms, we feel qurselves at once in the early years of the
twentieth century, no longer in the days of Morris and Ruskin. And
yet, in theory (if that is not too heavy an expression for his casual
apergus) and in technique, Whistler was as complete an Impressionist
as anybody, and therefore an object of passionate hatred to those who
worked for a new outlook on life and art.? There is no need to go again
into that unpleasant case, Whistler versus Ruskin. Morris was bound
to follow Ruskin.* This was a matter of principle primarily, but also a
matter of taste. The man who regarded Burne-Jones as the great living
painter of the Late Victorian era could certainly not appreciate Whistler’s
superficial (truly superficial) pictorial impressions.

One would expect to find the same contrast between the disciples of
the Arts and Crafts and the Impressionists as between Morris and
Whistler. However, it is a fact which has already been mentioned in
connexion with the exhibitions of Les Vingt, that on the Continent the
introduction of Impressionism, and of the new decorative style in both
its forms, as Art and Crafts and as Art Nouveau, took place concurrently
and were both due to the same persons. Meier-Graefe, who was one of
the first to discover van de Velde, wrote books on Renoir and Degas,
and also on van Gogh and Gauguin. And even today most people inter-
ested in art are unaware of the irreconcilable difference between
Impressionism as a doctrine and the doctrine of Morris and all his
followers. Yet, it is obvious that the antithesis, Impressionism versus
Arts and Crafts, is but the artistic expression of a far more compre-
hensive cultural antithesis between twe generations. On the one side
there is a conception of art as a rapid rendering of momentary surface

effects, on the other as an expression of what is final and essential; on
the one side there is the philosophy of Art for Art’s sake, on the other
a renewed faith in a social message of art. The Impressionists stand for
the exquisite luxuries of late-nineteenth-century Paris, the Arts and
Crafts for ‘roughing it’ in the spirit of that Youth Movement which is
so significant of the years around 1900 and after, and can be traced in
Bergson as much as in the foundation of the first ‘modern’ public
schools in England: Abbotsholme (1889) and Bedales (1892).

In design, Voysey is the outstanding but by no means the only
representative of this new joie de vivre. Some of Crane’s late wallpapers
also depart from Morris’s heaviness. Frank Brangwyn’s designs for
textiles are another example, As long as Continental architects believed
in Art Nouveau, it was chiefly English designs for wallpapers, printed
linens, chintzes, and so on which appealed to them. As soon as the new
desire for Sachlichkeit spread, all the pioneer work done by the English
architects and artists in the shaping (not the decoration) of objects
became topical. It must have been a delightful surprise to those who -
like Muthesius - came to England, weary not only of Victorian stuffiness
but also of the licence of Art Nouveau, to see a toast rack or a cruet set
designed by Voysey (Pl. 80). The refreshing simplicity of his wallpapers
is also the keynote of these small things of everyday use. Their charm
lies solely in the cleanness and gracefulness of their shapes.

Of particular importance for the coming Modern Movement was the
expression of this new spirit in furnishing. The entrance hall of Voysey’s
house, The Orchard, Chorleywood, Hertfordshire, of 1900 can serve
as an example (P].8r), with its lightness; the woodwork painted white,
a pure intense blue for the tiles, unmitigated contrasts of uprights
and horizontals, especially in the screen to the staircase (a motif which
was for a time to become eminently popular), and furniture of bold,
direct, if a little outré forms.

There is one more thing which must be said about Voysey and which
places him further from Morris and close to us. He was a designer, not
a craftsman. He could not in fact, so he told the author, work in any
craft. Ernest Gimson (1864-1920),® the greatest of the English artist-
craftsmen, was, as a matter of fact, in not too different a position,

although not many people realize it. He had been trained, it is true, in
craftsmanship, but his famous works of cabinetmaking, metal-work,
and so on are only designed and not made by him. The chairs shown
here (PI. 82) give an impression of his honesty, his feeling for the nature
of wood, and his unrevolutionary spirit. Few of his works have this
superb simplicity. As a rule, Gimson was more responsive to English
tradition and did not despise the use of forms invented in the past.

On a really commercial basis good progressive furniture was at the
same time made by Sir Antbrose Heal (1872-1959). The firm of
Heal & Son had been producing Victorian furniture, until Ambrose
Heal changed its course. A wardrobe which Heal’s showed at the Paris
Exhibition of 1900 (P1.83) has the same brightness which we found in
Voysey’s wallpapers. Plain surfaces of slightly fumed and waxed oak
contrast with small panels decorated in pewter and ebony. There are no
long curves; the patterns are composed of rectangles and gracefully-
drawn little flowers. The close atmosphere of medievalism has vanished.
Living amongst such objects, we breathe a fresher air.

Even more important historically than such exhibition pieces of
Heal’s was their production for the ordinary market. In 1898, the first
catalogue of Heal’s Plain Oak Furniture came out and started the revival
of the simple wooden bedstead in England.'° For more than twenty
years these pleasant bedsteads were popular in the English furniture
trade, until they were swept away by misguided supporters of modern-
istic forms.

Exactly the same contrast between 1890 and 1900 as in cabinet-
making is to be found in English printing. Morris’s Kelmscott Press -
founded in 1890 - produced pages the effect of which depends largely
on their exquisite medievalist decoration. Cobden-Sanderson’s and
Emery Walker’s Doves Press - founded in 1900 and mentioned in this
book on page 35 - secured for the plain unadorned type face its place
in modern book production,

As far as English architecture is concerned, the historical position is
not quite so simple as in applicd art. It has been pointed out that, by
1890, Norman Shaw had attained a style which, based on Queen Anne,
was so ‘modern’ in character and so perfectly suited to English needs

84. Mackmurdo: 8 Private Road, Enfield, c. 1883.

and taste that it could hardly be improved on, as long as no open break
with tradition was attempted. The earliest and most remarkable cases
of independence ~ earlier in fact than that of Horta - are afforded by
some of the early architectural works of Mackmurdo and Voysey.
Mackmurdo’s house, 8 Private Road, Enfield (P1.84) built about 1883
is of a surprisingly free carriage. The flat roof and the few horizontal
windows of the upper floor are particularly noteworthy. Although much
more orderly it forms in its independence of approach a parallel, the
only European parallel, to Godwin’s house of 1878 for Whistler. In
1882 Mackmurdo founded the Century Guild, the first of all those
groups of artist-craftsmen-designers who followed the teaching of
William Morris. Of 1883 was his amazing title page which started Art
Nouveau on its way. In 1886 Mackmurdo put up the stand, for the
products of his guild at an exhibition at Liverpool, which is illustrated
in Plate 85. The attenuated shafts with their excessive top cornices
instead of capitals and the repetition of these odd forms on top of the

85. Mackmurdo: Exhibition stand, Liverpool,
1886.

fascia board are even more original, and started a fashion, when Voysey
and then several others took them up. Of Mackmurdo’s strong influence
on Voysey there can be no doubt. He himself said to the author that
when he was very young Mackmurdo had impressed him even more
than Morris, Yet the first house which Voysey built, the one in The
Parade at Norman Shaw’s garden suburb, Bedford Park near London
(P1,86), is amazingly independent, considering the date, 1891. The
arrangement of the windows is particularly striking. But whereas this
kind of free grouping also prevails in the works of Norman Shaw and
his school, the whiteness of the walls was an open protest against the
surrounding red brick of Shaw’s garden suburb, The tower-like tallness
of the house also and the skipping rhythm of bare walls and horizontal
window openings were innovations introduced deliberately and not
without a youthful sense of mischief.

However, Voysey did not go on in that direction, or else he would have
developed into an architect of Art Nouveau. Already in the tiny studio

86. Voysey: House in Bedford Park, near London,
1891.

built in St Dunstan’s Road, West Kensington, London, in the same
year 1891 (P1.87), the general proportions are closer to Eng'ish tradi-
tions, cottage traditions, than anything in the house in Bedford Park,
although the detail is again remarkably novel, above all the massive
chimney, the batter of the buttresses on the right and also the ironwork
in front (obviously inspired by Mackmurdo’s woodwork of 1886),
When Voysey began to get commissions for houses in the country,
his appreciation of English traditions was decisively strengthened."!
A man of intense feeling for nature, as his designs prove him to have
been, he could not but think of his houses in conjunction with the sur-
rounding countryside, and so shapes offered themselves which were
more akin to the English manor house and cottage of the past than to
those he had evolved in London. His country-house practice began in the
early nineties and by 1900 had assumed very large dimensions. He never
built a church, never a public building, and only once a small warehouse.

87. Voysey: Studio, St Dunstan’s Road, West Kensington, London, 1891.

Perrycroft, Colwall, Malvern Hills, dates from 1893 (P1.88). It is
typical of Voysey’s ideas of what a country house should be like. In spite
of such strikingly modern features as the consistently horizontal
fenestration and the massive block shapes of the chimney-stacks, it is
nowhere demonstratively anti-traditional, and it fits perfectly with its
natural surroundings (a garden was planned and planted together with
the house) and the architectural character of the country.

This is even more evident in another building, the house erected for
Canon L.Grane at Shackleford in Surrey, in 1897 (P1.89). Today it is
not easy to appreciate the candour and simplicity of its fagade. For, in
Britain at least, it has become too much of a standard example ineptly
imitated by hundreds of speculative builders all along the arterial roads
and all over the suburbs. However, from the historian’s point of view,
it remains no small feat to have created the pattern for the vast majority

88. Voysey: Perrycroft, Colwall, Malvern Hills, 1893.

89. ° Voysey: House at Shackleford, Surrey, 1897.

of buildings carried out over a period of thirty years and more. What
was not copied from Voysey, needless to say, was what impresses us
today as his most progressive motifs - the long- drawn-out window
strips and the completely bare triangles of the gables, broken only in
one place by a charmingly tiny and just a trifle precious window.

This introduction of an occasional effect of Art Nouveau piquancy
helps a great deal to lighten the otherwise puritan honesty of many of
Voysey’s houses. Thus for instance in the lodge of Merishanger on the
Hog’s Back near Guildford, Surrey, designed in 1896 (PI. 90), the typical
Voysey buttresses and far projecting caves carry a very flat curved
cupola with a spirelet, needle-thin and ending in a weather-vane. In the
same way in one of his most successful country houses, Broadleys on
Lake Windermere (Pl.91) of 1898 the eaves cornice is supported once
again by thin iron brackets and their delicacy adds a touch of lightness
to the whole front.

But such effects are only a litde light relief in what is otherwise sound,
balanced, vigorous design without any tendency to demonstrative
novelty. That is what makes the water front of Broadleys so impressive.
Here, one sees clearly, was a mind equally averse to the picturesque

go. Voysey: Lodge and stables, Merishanger, near Guildford, Surrey, 1896.

tricks of the Shaw school and the preciousness of Art Nouveau. From
this centre bay with its completely unmoulded mullions and transoms,
from these windows cut clean and sheer into the wall, access to the
architectural style of today could have been direct, more direct probably
than from the designs of those few in England who in the late nineties
appeared more revolutionary than Voysey. Whom should one count
amongst them? Maybe Baillie Scott (1865-1945) who started a litde
later than Voysey and very much under his influence,!? and C.R. Ashbee,
whose writings and social activities have been mentioned before and
whose most original houses, in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London were
designed as early as 1899.!? Even more remarkable historically is
the Mary Ward Settlement in Tavistock Place, London (Pl. 92), built
in 1895 by Dunbar Smith (1866-1933) and Cecil Brewer (1871-1918).
Its relation to Norman Shaw (Venetian window) as well as to Voysey
(top parts of the projecting wings) is evident. The rhythm of the blocks
on the other hand, the proportions of the recessed centre part with its

91. Voysey: Broadleys on Lake Windermere, 1898.

92. Smith and Brewer: Mary Ward Settlement, Tavistock Place, London, 1895.

¥ a,
93. Townsend: Whitechapel Art Gallery,
London, 1897-9.

blank brick wall and the high bare cornice, the wide projection of the
roofs, all point distinctly forward to the style of today, and the asym-
metrically projecting porch is freer and more ‘organic’ in treatment
than Voysey ever wanted to be.

This particular feature in its turn must have impressed the older
C. Harrison Townsend (1852~1928) whose principal work, the White-
chapel Art Gallery, London, dates from 1897-9 (P1.93). But Townsend’s
style is of more complex origins. The deliberate lack of symmetry
between ground floor and upper floor, as well as the long row of sur-
prisingly low windows and the leaf ornament of the friezes, ultimately
point no doubt to Voysey, but the heavy arch above the entrance must
reflect some knowledge on Townsend’s part of what Richardson had

94. Townsend: Horniman Museum, London,
1900-1902.

done in America for twenty years and more.!? If this assumption is
correct, we have here the first case of American influence on England,
The two flat friezes above the row of windows also conjure up some
memories of, say, Richardson’s Brattle Square Church in Boston of
1870-72, and the American connexion became more distinct with
Townsend’s next building, the Horniman Museum in South London
of 1900~1902 (Pl.94). The robust square tower with its rounded corners
and stumpy top is utterly different from the elegant spirelets which
Voysey and his imitators adored so much. Townsend’s designs during
these years, in spite of all that it might be possible to say about sources in
England and abroad, are without question the most remarkable example of
a reckless repudiation of tradition among English architects of the time.

Among English, not among British architects. For in Glasgow there
worked during these very years a group of artists as original and as
imaginative as any in Europe. In painting, the Glasgow Boys, Guthrie,
E.A. Walton, Lavery, Henry, Hornel, and so on are well enough known.
Their first exhibition abroad impressed Europe considerably. But in
design and decoration the first appearance of the Glasgow school at an
exhibition in Vienna in 1900 was a revelation.

The centre of the group was Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868-
1928) with his wife Margaret Macdonald and her sister Mrs McNair. *
In dealing with him, we are able at last to link up the development in
England with the main tendency of Continental architecture in the
nineties, with Art Nouveau. Before he was twenty-eight, Mackintosh
was chosen to design the new building for the Glasgow School of Art,
a remarkably bold choice due largely to the principal Francis H.
Newbery. The designs date from 1897; the first part of the building
was completed in 1899 (Pl.95). Not a single feature here is derived from
period styles. The fagade is of a strongly personal character and, in
many ways, leads on to the twentieth century, although the entrance
bay with balcony and short turret is deliberately fantastical and not un-
like Townsend’s contemporary work, But the rest of the front is ex-
tremely simple, almost austere in its bold uniform fenestration. In the
horizontal windows to the offices on the ground floor and the high studio
windows on the upper floor, no curves are admitted; unbroken upright
lines prevail even in the railing in front of the building, counteracted
only by a few lighter and more playful Art Nouveau ornaments at the
top. The same contrast exists between the rigidity of the upper-floor
windows and the strange metal stalks at their base, functionally justified
for putting planks on to facilitate window cleaning. However, be that
as it may, this row of metal lines reveals one of Mackintosh’s principal
sources and at the same time one of his most characteristic qualities.
The source, particularly telling in the strange balls at the top of the
stalks, with their intertwined tentacles of iron, is clearly the Celtic and
Viking art of Britain, as it became familiar beyond the circles of scholars
just at this time.’* The quality equally eloquent in the balls and the
stalks is Mackintosh’s intense fecling for spatial values. Our eyes have

i,
a

A

.
r)

on

95. Mackintosh: Schoo} of Art, Glasgow, 1896-9.

to pass through the first layer of space, indicated by the stalks and balls
before arriving at the solid stone front of the building. The same
transparency of pure space will be found in all Mackintosh’s principal
works.

The ground plan of the building is clear and Jucid, showing in another
light the architect’s interest in space, an interest rare among artists of
Art Nouveau. One more instance may be given to prove that this is

96. Mackintosh: School of Art, Glasgow,
1907-9. Interior of library.

really the keynote of Mackintosh’s creation: the interior of the library
of the Glasgow School of Art, which forms the centre room of the west
wing, planned in 1907 (P1.96). The simple motif of a high room with
aisles and galleries around three sides is so enriched that the resulting
impression is an overwhelmingly full polyphony of abstract form. The
galleries do not project far enough to reach the pillars which separate
‘nave’ from ‘aisles’. Horizontal beams are inserted to connect the walls
with the pillars and to support the galleries. Airy balustrades, Art
Nouveau in detail, run from the parapets of the gallery to the pillars.
Their sole purpose is to offer interesting perspectives, Curves, rare and
all the more expressive in Mackintosh’s earlier work, have now com-
pletely disappeared. Uprights and horizontals, squares and oblongs
determine the effect. This and the number of fascinating vistas which
the architect has achieved here and in another principal work of the
same period, the Cranston Tearoom in Sauchiehall Street, 1904 (Pl.97),

97. Mackintosh: Cranston Tearoom, Sauchichall Street, Glasgow, 1904.
Interior.

show him as the European counterpart of Frank Lloyd Wright and one
of the few true forerunners of the most ingenious juggler with space
now alive: Le Corbusier. Le Corbusier once confessed that his desire in
building is to create poetry. Mackintosh’s attitude is very similar.
Building in his hands becomes an abstract art, both musical and
mathematical.

The facade of the west wing of the art school is an instance of this.
Here the abstract artist is primarily concerned with the shaping of
volume and not of space, of solids, not of voids (P1.98). The aesthetic
value of the straight, slender shafts into which the windows are inserted
is entirely independent of their function, The contrasts between fret-
work and solid ashlar, and between the menacing bareness on the left
and the complex polyphony on the right, are also effects more com-
parable to abstract relief than to buildings of Voysey’s kind.

A glance at the earlier and the later part of the art school reveals the

98. Mackintosh: School of Art, Glasgow, 1907-9. Library wing.

development of Mackintosh’s taste between 1897 and 1907. Delicate
metal ornament of linear appeal is no longer used. A squareness and
robustness prevail which come as a surprise. They are, it seems certain,
Mackintosh’s way of admitting national tradition. His links with the
Scottish baronial past are perhaps more evident in his country houses
than in a public building such as the School of Art. If we look at the

99. Mackintosh: Hill House, Helensburgh, near Glasgow, 1902-3.

general form and outline of Hill House at Helensburgh, 1902-3, the
steep gables and the massive chimney-stacks are unmistakable (Pl. 99).
Once that has been recognized, the library wing of the art school will at
once show its baronial relations, perched as it is on the steep slope of the
street leading up the front. Its great fascination is in fact its synthesis
of traditional elements with a remarkable fearlessness in the functional
distribution of the windows and the weird harshness of its narrow,
angular, upright forms. From here a direct way leads to that peculiar
and short-lived Expressionism in Continental and especially Dutch
architecture which for a while held up the progress of the main stream
of modern architecture about 1920.'7 Whether the Dutch architects
had actually taken notice of Mackintosh’s later buildings is not certain.
Their main source in any case was not foreign. It was H.P. Berlage
(1856-1934). Berlage, regarded in Holland as of greater European
significance than appears convincing, is essentially a counterpart to
Voysey rather than to Mackintosh, that is, essentially a believer in the
possibilities of developing native traditions towards modern goals. His
point of departure was the brick architecture of the Dutch Middle Ages

100. Berlage: House, 42-4 Oude Scheveningsche Weg, The Hague, 1898.
Stair well.

and a faith in craftsmanship. That gives his most famous building, the
Exchange in Amsterdam, begun in 1898, its solid, sane, trustworthy
character. Yet inside it, and, even more, the house Nos. 42-4 Oude
Scheveningsche Weg at The Hague (PI.100), there is curious, sharp,
jagged decoration in brick and iron, as reminiscent of Gaudi as of
Expressionism. J. M.van der Mey, fifteen years younger, in the Scheep-
vaarthuis at Amsterdam of 1911-16, the years which mark the end of
the period under discussion in this book, made a whole big facade out
of these Expressionist motifs of Berlage, scattering his fundamental
soundness to the winds. Here architectural Expressionism is attained
five or teu years earlier than anywhere else. The Scheepvaarthuis on
the one hand, Gaudi’s late works on the other, are the links between
Art Nouveau and Expressionism.

However, while this may be the connexion between late Mackintosh

101. Mackintosh: Cranston Tearoom, Buchanan
Street, Glasgow, 1897-8.

and the Continent, that between early Mackintosh and one particular
Continental country, Austria, is of much greater historical interest and,
because it also raises a somewhat intricate question, it demands a rather
more detailed discussion. The obvious similarity between Mackintosh’s
earliest interior designs - or one should rather say the interior designs
of Mackintosh and Margaret Macdonald — and the style of the Viennese
Sezession, has often been commented on. The Cranston Tearoom in
Buchanan Street of 1897-8 (Pl. 101) should be studied in this con-
nexion — incidentally the first monument of the British tearoom move-
ment, a movement, in its opposition to the snugness and stuffiness of
the pub, again typical of the new desire for health and daintiness.
In the Buchanan Street tearoom the walls are decorated with the same
long and graceful lines and the same excessively slim figures which we
find in the works of Klimt and his followers. But the tearoom dates from

102, Klimt: Tragedy, 1897.

1897, and in that year, Klimt’s manner was still dependent on that of
the earlier draughtsmen of Art’ Nouveau (Pl.102). One year later, in
1898, when the Sezession started their periodical Ver Sacrum, its pages
were decorated in a style strikingly similar to Mackintosh’s. As the
Studio had published some designs for the Cranston Tearoom in 1897,
one can safely conclude that the change of taste in the artists of the
Sezession was at least partly caused by impressions received from
Mackintosh’s work.!® This hypothesis is confirmed by the fact that in
1900 the Sezession in Vienna chose to invite Mackintosh and his group
to show work at their annual exhibition in Vienna, and in 1901, as a
result of this, Mackintosh furnished and decorated the Music Room for
Fritz Warndorfer who, two years later, gave the money for the founda-
tion of the Wiener Werkstitte. The motifs of the music room were,
incidentally, taken from Maeterlinck’s Sep: Princesses. What was so
thrilling to the artists of Vienna in Mackintosh’s style has been formu-
lated very well by Ahlers-Hestermann: ‘Here was indeed the oddest
mixture of puritanically severe forms designed for use, with a truly
lyrical evaporation of all interest in usefulness. These rooms were like

dreams, narrow panels, grey silk, very very slender wooden shafts -
verticals everywhere. Little cupboards of rectangular shape and with
far projecting top cornices, smooth, not of visible frame-and-panel
construction; straight, white, and serious-looking, as if they were young
girls ready to go to their first Holy Communion — and yet not really; for
somewhere there was a piece of decoration like a gem, never interfering
with the contour, lines of hesitant elegance, like a faint distant echo of
van de Velde. The fascination of these proportions, the aristocratically
effortless certainty with which an ornament of enamel, coloured glass,
semi-precious stone, beaten metal was placed, fascinated the artists of
Vienna who were already a little bored with the eternal solid goodness
of English interiors. Here was mysticism and asceticism, though by no
means in a Christian sense, but with much of a scent of heliotrope, with
well-manicured hands and a delicate sensuousness. . . . As against the
former overcrowding, there was hardly anything in these rooms, except
that, say, two straight chairs, with backs as tall as a man, stood on a
white carpet and looked silently and spectrally at each other across a
little table . . . “Chambres garnies pour belles dmes” is what Meier-
Graefe wrote.’

Ideal evidence of these intentions was the house which Mackintosh
designed for a competition held by the German publisher Koch in 1901
(Pl.103). Here everything can be seen that Ahlers-Hestermann is
talking about and it can also be seen clearly enough that Mackintosh’s
sources are Voysey, Beardsley, Toorop.’® This synthesis of their style
was the legacy of Britain to the coming Modern Movement. No other
British contribution to European architecture before the First World
War carries enough weight to be discussed here.?° For various reasons
England forfeited her leadership in the shaping of the new style just
about 1900, that is, at the very moment when the work of all the pioneers
began to converge into one universal movement. One reason was given
in Chapter 1:?! the levelling tendency of the coming mass movement —
and a true architectural style zs for every man — was too much against
the grain of the English character. A similar antipathy prevented the
ruthless scrapping of traditions which was essential to the achievement
of a style fitting our century. So, at the very moment when Continental

architects discovered the elements of a genuine style for the future in
English building and English crafts, England herself receded into an
eclectic Neo-Classicism, with hardly any bearing on present-day prob-
lems and needs. For country houses and town houses Neo-Georgian
or Neo-Colonial became popular; in public buildings, banks and so on,
solemn rows of colossal columns reappeared, not entirely free from the
influence of the United States, where, after the Chicago Exhibition of
1893, a similar reaction against the Chicago school and Sullivan had
set in, Burnham’s Selfridge Building of 1908 in London illustrates this
tendency at its most demonstrative.

The contention that the sudden fall in the European importance of
English architecture really took place shortly after 1900 is also confirmed
by the development of town planning. England was ahead during the
second half of the nineteenth century. From the forties the beginnings
of modern planning of flats and small houses for workmen can be
traced.?® The first planned estates of small houses were due to pro-
gressive manufacturers (Saltaire, Sir Titus Salt, begun in 185r).?° The
earliest estate of friendly, semi-detached brick houses embedded in
trees was erected at Bedford Park near London to Norman Shaw’s
designs from 1875 onwards. Shortly after Bedford Park, Port Sunlight
and Bournville were started, both garden estates for members of the
staff of a big firm, Port Sunlight was built for Lever’s from 1888 on,
Bournville for Cadbury’s from 1895 on.

The idea of the independent garden city was put forward by Ebenezer
Howard in his famous book Tomorrow: a Peaceful Path to Real Reform
(1898). It was taken up by the founders of Letchworth. The plan of this
garden city (begun in 1904) was due to Raymond Unwin and Barry
Parker. The same architects were responsible for the layout of the
Hampstead Garden Suburb (1907).

These English estates strongly influenced the Continent. Krupp’s
started its first workers’ estate in 1891. The first independent garden
city in Germany, Hellerau, near Dresden, was begun in 1909, on the
initiative of the Deutsche Werkstatten. The plan was by Riemerschmid.
However, in Germany the main interest soon shifted over from the

niectian af the actate nf emall hnancec tn that af lacroce Annerns echemesc

103. Mackintosh: Dining-room for the House of a Connoisseur, 1901.

consisting of blocks of flats. It is this problem and the related one of
planning whole urban areas that occupied the minds of German town
planners between 1900 and the First World War.

The history of town planning from 1850 to 1914 runs strikingly
parallel to that of contemporary architecture and decoration. Of the
two biggest tasks that were put to architects during the third quarter of
the century, the Viennese Ringstrasse is a gorgeous chain of individual
buildings entirely or almost entirely unrelated to each other, whereas
Haussmann’s memorable opening up of large boulevards all through
the centre of Paris is certainly much more architectural in that spatial
values are not neglected for those of volume. However, in Paris as well
as in Vienna, the social questions of slum clearance and rehousing re-
mained untouched, and the same may be said of all town planning in
other European and American cities. Neither did the new tendencies
which started about 1890 help to solve these urgent problems. Burnham
in Chicago began the movement for the erection of monumental Civic
Centres in the United States, a movement that conquered England after
1900. In Germany, Camillo Sitte’s book Der Stadtcbau (1889) pleaded
against the hollow grandeur of Neo-Baroque squares and roads, and

proposed a freer, more picturesque planning on medieval lines. Both
Sitte and Burnham still thought in terms of individual pieces of planned
development.

It has been shown that the interpretation of town planning not only
as a display of civic power but as planning for the welfare and comfort
of the whole population originated in England and remained confined
to England for well over a decade, But, as soon as planning was applied
to areas larger than the garden estate of a firm, municipal initiative had
to replace private enterprise. It is extremely characteristic that directly
this stage was reached, England dropped out and Germany took the
lead. Most German towns own a great deal of the building Jand within
their boundaries and - helped by legislation - try to acquire more.
Theodor Fischer, one of the most energetic young architects, was
elected city architect for Munich in the nineties; the periodical Der
Stddtebau began to appear in 1904; towns such as Niirnberg, Ulm,
Mannheim, Frankfurt, worked out comprebensive schemes for the
development of centre and suburbs. The town-planning exhibition
held at Berlin in 1910 can be taken as the final summing-up of these
tendencies as they flourished before the First World War.*4

Since 1918, the huge housing estates set up above all in Holland,
Germany, and Austria have done more than any other type of building
to draw the attention of other countries to the existence of a modern
architectural style. In England it was hardly before 1930 that working-
class estates of blocks of flats began to take an interest in the twentieth-
century style, the style which, between I900 and 1925, had been
developed by American, French, and German architects.

7° The Modern Movement before
Nineteen-fourteen

THE most progressive countries in the fifteen years before the First
World War were the United States, France, Germany, and Austria.
At first, America took the lead; but no accepted style was evolved. The
initiative was confined to a few great architects, one might even say to
one man, In France, one side of the coming style was developed with
admirable consistency, but again only by one small group of engineer-
architects. Germany alone, and those Central European countries which
were dependent on Germany (Switzerland, Austria, Scandinavia) re-
sponded so appreciatively to the adventurous achievements of the first
pioneers that the recognized accepted style of our age could emerge
from their individual experiments.

The contribution of France to the Modern Movement before the war
consists exclusively in the work of two architects: Auguste Perret and
Tony Garnier. Perret was born in 1874, Garnier in 1869.) Their fore-
most distinction is that they were the first to use concrete outside and
inside their buildings without concealing the material and its particular
character and without adapting it to the spirit of past styles. In this, they
went beyond Baudot, whose forms at St Jean de Montmartre, though
not actually copied from Gothic architecture, tend to express through
the medium of concrete the feelings enshrined in the medieval cathedral.
In Perret’s work, there is no such irresolution. The block of flats at
No. 25 drs rue Franklin, which he built in r902-3, and in which he lived
himself, is equally uncompromising in ground plan and fagade (Pl. ro4).
It is eight storeys high and constructed with a concrete framework.
The two uppermost floors recede in the manner which has become
compulsory in high American buildings, and is becoming more and

104. Perret: Block of flats, 25 bis rue Franklin,
Paris, 1902-3.

more accepted in Europe too. On top is an open terrace with a few
plants, a forecast of roof gardens to come. The facade exhibits the
structure to a degree unprecedented in domestic architecture. Though
the infilling panels are of ceramic ware with foliage decoration in relief,
the eye is not detained by them, but follows the vertical and horizontal
girders and beams all along the front. A nakedness appears that seemed
shameless at the time when the house was built. Especially important
for the future is the complexity of advance and recession, the fullness
of spatial effects. It is hardly possible to decide which of the various
vertical planes may be termed the facade proper. Above the two entrance
doors a column of square bay-windows is projected. Six storeys thus
seem balanced without any support. In the centre part, the facade
recedes, but right in the middle another row of bay-windows projects
slightly. Mackintosh alone of all European architects had a spatial
imagination of comparable brilliance.

ne

aut
.

106. Garnier: Industrial City, 1901-4. Under the canopy, Administration
Building.

Equally revolutionary is the style of Tony Garnier’s plans for an
Industrial City made in 1901 and exhibited in 1904.” Garnier (1869-
1948) was a Pensionnaire de |’Académie de France in Rome, when he
embarked upon the task of mapping out a modern city as it ought to be.
It was a demonstration against all academism in the choice of subject,
in its treatment, and in the introductory remarks which accompanied
its presentation. ‘Like all architecture based on false principles’,
Garnier had the audacity to write, ‘ancient architecture is an error.
Truth alone is beautiful. In architecture, truth is the result of calcula-
tions made to satisfy known necessities with known materials. ’* So, in

107. Garnier: Industrial City, 1901-4. Railway Station.

his chosen field of town planning he pleaded for a linear as against a
concentric plan for his town, for a sensible grouping of industry,
administration, and housing, and for sufficient open spaces; he enjoyed
flat roofs, open and covered playgrounds for schools, and he refused to
admit any narrow inner courts. Moreover there are certain buildings in
the Industrial City which appear to be wholly of today. For the first
time here the possibility of ‘misdating’ arises. In the Administration
Building (Pls. 105 and 106), the flat roofs, the complete absence of
mouldings, and above all the long canopy on the right with its few
supports and its bold cantilevering — all this seems hardly possible at
such an early date. Again in the Railway Station (Pl. 107) the transparent
concrete tower and the unrelieved grid of the front and the cantilevered
canopies on the slenderest supports are entirely of the twentieth
century.* So is the Cubism of the small houses (P1. 108) and their placing
in a street with freely grouped trees and patches of lawn (Pl. 109). The
combination of cubic wings with a domed centre of highly unconven-
tional shape (PI. 110) is as surprising as the glass vault over the Palm
Court of a hotel (Pl.111). The material of this looks just like the glass

Hf oy

rT i

108. Garnier: Industrial City, 1901-4. Four private houses.

bricks which became so popular in the 1920s and 1930s. Equally popular
was the newel staircase displaying its spiral on the outside, and that also
is anticipated in the Industrial City, where a staircase tower, half
looking back to Blois, half looking forward to 1914 and after, forms
the centre of a block of one-room flats.

Technically the most interesting feature in Garnier’s designs for the
Industrial City is the cantilever for the administrative building. It
implies an understanding of the possibilities of reinforced concrete
which was still rare by 1904. Historians of engineering ought to pro-
nounce on this point. Perret in the rue Franklin and to the end of his
days used concrete in the post and lintel manner developed in stone
building. The first, it is always said, fully to appreciate the combined
advantages of reinforced concrete both under compression and under
tension was the Swiss engineer Robert Maillart (1872-1940) a pupil of
Hennebique. In his Tavenasa Bridge of 1905 the arch and the roadway
are one structural unity (Pl.112). The slabs of which they consist, one
curved, the other straight, are active structural elements. The same
principle was applied by Maillart to the construction of buildings by

means of mushroom pillars merging with the ceiling slab above. His
experiments showed their first results in 1908, the year in which the
American engineer C.A.P.Turner published a paper in the Western
Architect on the same technique evolved by himself. In rg10 Maillart
built his first warehouse in this new ‘monolithic’ method.

Here, in Maillart’s bridges, and in that mysterious cantilever of
Garnier’s drawing one becomes for the first time aware of completely
new aesthetic potentialities lying in store for the twentieth century.
France was not the country in which they were going to be developed.
In fact France at this moment can disappear from our stage. Between
1904 and 1921, the year of Le Corbusier’s Citrohan designs, she did
not contribute anything of international significance. Le Corbusier*
(born in 1887) is Swiss, but has spent nearly his whole working life in
Paris. If his work before 1921 is not considered in this book, the reason
is that he cannot be considered in the same category of pioneers as the
architects to whom it is devoted, though he has tried in his writings to
make himself appear one of the first-comers. His designs for an estate
called Domino, which was to be built entirely in concrete, are certainly
very progressive, and they date from 1915; but in 1916 Le Corbusier
could still build 2 private house that does not go beyond the stage
reached by Perret or van de Velde before the war,”

Frank Lloyd Wright’s own writings are almost as misleading as Le
Corbusier’s, but in his case the pioneer achievements of his early years
are patent and easily documented. And Wright was not only one of our
pioneers himself, but also pupil and follower of a pioneer. Of Sullivan
much has already been said regarding his revolutionary theory (p. 28),
his revolutionary ornament (p. 97), and his revolutionary treatment of
the skyscraper in its earlier years (p. 141). His most astonishing aesthetic
achievement, however, is the Schlesinger & Mayer, now Carson Pirie
Scott, Store, in Chicago (P]. 113). This was begun in 1899 in Madison
Street and enlarged by a taller block round the corner into State Street
in 1903-4. The ornament on the ground floor and second floor is Sullivan
at his most fanciful, but the upper storeys exhibit the rhythm of the
twentieth century more uncompromisingly than any building we have
met so far in these pages. Here again, a detail photograph of several rows

109. Garnier: Industrial City, 1901~4. Street.

111 Garnier: Industrial City, 1901-4. Palm Court.

112. Maillart: Tavenasa Bridge, 1905.

of these horizontal windows with the unbroken white bands which
separate them horizontally would no doubt be misdaced by nearly
everybody.

Meanwhile, Frank Lloyd Wright had begun to revolutionize the
private house with similar courage.’ His inspiration came from
Richardscn’s houses and from the forms and approach to architecture
which he learned in Sullivan’s office. The Charnley House in Astor
Street, Chicago, of 1891 (Pl.114), scems both to reflect Sullivan’s style
in the Wainwright Building and to foretell Wright’s own later develop-
ment. It can therefore be safely assumed that it represents Wright’s
fairly independent designing during the years when he was still em-
ployed by Sullivan. In date and originality it corresponds to the Mary
Ward Settlement.

Two years later the Winslow House at River Forest (Pl. 115) has the
same sense of broad flat surfaces and the same consistent emphasis on
horizontals. It still possesses an upper floor decorated in the Sullivan
manner and nothing yet of Wright’s future mastery of spatial planning.
Compared with Voysey at Colwall in the same year 1893, it is clear that

113. Sullivan: Carson Piric Scott Store, Chicago,
1899 and 1903~4.

Wright was moving away from precedent, Voysey towards a compromise
between the past and the present.

Wright’s sense of three-dimensional composition leaped to maturity
about 1900. The projected Yahara Boat Club at Madison of 1902
(Pl.116) shows far projecting canopies over the two doors and far
stretching-out terraces in front of them taking some outer space close
to the body of a house which is however still strictly symmetrical in its
shape, The windows, high up and low, are now entirely of the character-
istic rhythm of the twentieth-century style.

Another three vears and the WR YUeath House at Buffalo (PI.117)

Sane

114. Sullivan and Wright: Charnley House, Chicago, 1891.

115. Wright: Winslow House, River Forest, lllinois, 1893.

Se
|) aS

ee,

117. Wright: Heath House, Buffalo, New York, 1905.

11g. Wright: Design for a skyscraper,
1895.

AW.

120. Wright: Larkin Building, Buffalo, New York, 1904.

has a plan spreading out loosely into a conglomeration of rooms which
run comfortably into each other, and an outline of the broad, free,
informal, prairie type of which Wright was so fond. There is no longer
any hard boundary between outer and inner space. The low spacious
interiors (Pl.118) have something irresistibly inviting, in spite of
Wright's never abating desire for harsh angular decorative forms -
forms similar to those of Berlage in Europe. No wonder that the Dutch
were the first to take kindly to Wright’s peculiar style when it had been
made known abroad by two German publications of 1910 and rg11.!"

The came difference hetween farlte. and mature as rhar hereeen rhe

Winslow and Heath Houses is to be tound between a design for a sky-
scraper done in 1895 and the Larkin Building at Buffalo of 1904
(Pls. 119 and 120), The skyscraper is again a personal paraphrase of
Sullivan ideas; the Larkin Building, with its sheer walls of flat bricks
unrelieved by windows or niches or mouldings, and with its string
courses and cornices of the simplest rectangular profile, is over-
whelmingly irapressive, in the hard way of today. The interior with its
spatial unity of all floors (Pl. 121), the ‘etherealization’ of which Wright
is so fond (see p. 214) may be derived from the European department
store. In Wright’s particular form it became the prototype of many
similar halls in European office buildings after the First World War.
To sum up, Frank Lloyd Wrighi’s outstanding importance lies in

121. Wright: Larkin Building,
Buffalo, New York, 1904.
Interior.


122. Endell: Elvira Studio, Munich, 1897-8.

the fact that nobody else had by 1904 come so near to the style of today
in his actual buildings. Wright’s later activity does not lie within the
scope of this book, and, as the work of his contemporaries and followers
before 1914 has not added anything essential beyond the master’s own
pronouncements, no more need be said here about the United States.
Thus the remaining pages can be devoted entirely to Germany and
Austria, with one Swiss and one Italian exception. While the transition
to the new simplicity and severity was facilitated in England by the
absence of Art Nouveau and by an inborn English reasonableness, in
America by the technical requirements of the huge office building, and
in France by the splendid traditions of nincteenth-century engineering,
Germany was, in 1900, almost completely under the spell of Art
Nouveau, enjoying wild ornamentation, as she had done so often in
past centuries. Only a few among those who had nlaved a leading vart

in the Jugendstil found a way out of its entanglement. Three artists
above all must be mentioned, as a German parallel to Mackintosh in
Great Britain.

August Endell’s (1871-1925) most popular work was the Elvira
Studio in Munich, built for a photographer in 1897-8 (Pl.122). The
deliberate lack of balance between openings and plain wall, or basement
windows and ground-floor windows, and also the curves of the metal
bars separating the window-panes, had affinities with Guimard in
Paris, with Gaudi at Barcelona, and Mackintosh in Glasgow. However,
the one dominant motif of the fagade, that overpowering shape, shell-
like or dragon-like, which covered the wall of the second floor, is
entirely original. In this frantic outbreak of ornamental fury, the un-
bounded exuberance of Germanic patterns of the migration period
re-emerged. This eternal quality of German art, traceable in Late
Romanesque and Late Gothic as well as in the ornament of Baroque
and Rococo, gives Endell his place in architecture; though it seems
highly probable that Obrist’s embroideries provided him with more
direct inspiration. Be that as it may, the Elvira Studio remains an
admirable tour de force, and one could rightly expect more surprises
from its inventor.

In the same year, when the front of the studio building was revealed,
Endell published a study on the emotional meaning of certain basic
proportions in building, which is equally original and inspiring.!? The
text to the illustration shown here (Pl. 123) describes the quiet balance
of Fig. 4, the strain of Fig. 2, a certain ease and comfortableness in
Fig. 3. Apart from this interesting attempt at an interpretation of archi-
tecture as an abstract art, the forms of the fagade shown in Fig. 3 are
astonishingly similar to those of certain German houses after the First
World War. The shape of the first-floor windows and the flat roof are
again almost ‘misdatable’.

A similar ambivalence appears in the work of the much older Viennese
architect Otto Wagner (1841-1918) and then of his pupil Josef Maria
Olbrich (1867-1908). Wagner, by his age, stood closer to Shaw and
McKim, Mead, & White than to Wright, Perret, and Garnier, He began
indeed with the conventional Neo-Baroaue and turned. as Shaw and

an

123. Endell: Studies in basic building proportions, 1898.

McKim, Mead, & White did, to soberer forms of Neo-Classicism. His
remarkably progressive Inaugural Lecture quoted in Chapter 1 dates
from 1894. After that date, that is when he was well over fifty, he
changed his style fundamentally, stimulated perhaps by his own pupil.
This at least the dates of the buildings seem to indicate. Olbrich'*
made his name with the building for the Sezession, the group of artists
which he, together with Klimt and others, founded and which de-
veloped the Austrian version of Art Nouveau, and later on led the way
from linear decoration towards the more architectural though equally
graceful style of the Wiener Werkstatte.'* The building of the Sezession
(Pl.124) was designed and erected in 1898-9. There is no need here
to say much about the Jugendstil qualitics of this metal cupola with its
superabundant floral decoration. A more essential point in our context
is the simplicity of its semicircular contour and the rhythm of the three
blocks which dominate the front view. This is in fact as novel as any-
thing to be found in Wricht’s work of the same period.'! In 1907-8.

124. Olbrich: The Sezession, Vienna, 1898~9.

Olbrich built the Hochzeitsturm (Pl.125) as a centre of the artists’
colony which the Grand Duke of Hessen had started in 1899 (cf. p. 230
n.31). Again a comparison with Mackintosh, this time with the library
wing of the Glasgow School of Art, seems justified. The conspicuous five
organ-pipe shapes on top of the tower are characteristic of the restless-
ness of many of those who wanted to break away from Art Nouveau,
but felt unable to make an altogether clean break. The most remarkable
feature from the point of view of today is the two narrow horizontal
strips with small windows which are wrapped round the corner, the
earliest instance probably of this motif, so much favoured by later
architects.

In reviewing the work of the second leader of Viennese architecture
at the beginning of the twentieth century, we are led one step further.
The most remarkable of Insef Hofmann’s (1890—-To<¢)!5 early works

125. Olbrich: Hochzeitsturm, Darmstadt, 1907-8.

is also the most ‘modern’, the Convalescent Home in Purkersdorf of
1903-4 (Pl. 126). Here again, even experts might be deceived and might
take these flat roofs, these windows without any mouldings, the square-
ness of this projecting roof over the entrance, and the high, upright
staircase window as something impossible before the First World War.
International as these motifs are, local peculiarities are all the same
clearly visible in the rhythm of the small window-panes and the delicate
bands running round the windows and along the edges of the block.
Josef Hoffmann’s magnum opus however is without any doubt the
Palais Stoclet in Brussels (Pl.127), designed in 1905. Its unusual size
and splendour have overshadowed all his other works. The Palais
Stoclet is a work of exceedingly spirited composition, its exquisitely
spaced openings and light walls are a joy to the eye, and the high un-
interrupted window of the staircase is again present; but the artistic

“7
ad

wy
r
TNE

126. Hoffmann: Convalescent Home, Purkersdorf, 1903-4.

attitude is here far from sachlich (rightly, no doubt): a charm and play-
fulness are expressed in these facades which are alien to most of the
outstanding buildings in the new style, though they are essentially
Austrian in character, In acknowledging the international unity of the
new style, it ought not to be forgotten that in Hoffmann’s elegance, in
Perret’s clarity, in Wright’s expansive broadness and comfortable
solidity, or in Gropius’s uncompromising directness, national qualities
are represented at their best.

But the art historian has to watch personal as well as national qualities.
Only the interaction of these with an age produces the complete picture

127. Hoffmann: Palais Stoclet, Brussels, 1905.

of the art of an epoch, as we see it. Rubens, Bernini, Rembrandt,
Vermeer are all representatives of their age, the age of Baroque. Yet
Rubens is as wholly a Fleming as Bernini is a Neapolitan and Rem-
brandt and Vermeer are Dutchmen. But Rembrandt as a personality
is completely opposed to Vermeer, when one compares them within
the smaller orbit of their national art, So it may be profitable to contrast
Hoffmann’s delightful building with the work of Adolf Loos!* (1870-
1933), so completely opposed in character, though Loos was also an
Austrian, His position in the development of aesthetic theory about
1900 has already been outlined. Now we have to define his place in
architectural history proper. Remembering his attacks on ornament
and his panegyrics upon the plumber, we are not surprised to find in
his first work, the interior of a shop in Vienna, 1898 (Pl.128), nothing
that can, strictly speaking, be called ornament. The value of this work
depends entirely on the high quality of the materials used and the dig-
nity of the proportions. The decorative effect of the upper frieze is
obtained by the introduction of convex curves and a quicker rhythm of
intersecting verticals and horizontals, Perret’s concrete ornament,
created without any knowledge of Loos’s style, is surprisingly similar
in character.

Six years later, in a house on the Lake of Geneva, Loos reached the


128. Loos: Shop interior, Vienna, 1898.

same delicately proportioned simplicity in an exterior, and six years
after that, in the Steiner House in Vienna (P1. 129), he achieved the style
of 1930 completely and without any limitation. The unmitigated con-
trast of receding centre and projecting wings, the unbroken line of the
roofs, the small openings in the attic, the horizontal windows with their
large undivided panes: who, without being informed, would not misdate
these features?'? Loos’s influence, in spite of such wholly uncompro-
mising designs, remained negligible for along time. All the other pioneers
were more widely known and imitated.

That Otto Wagner, although over sixty years old, was freshly stimu-
lated by these young pupils or followers of his, seems almost certain in
his Post Office Savings Bank in Vienna (PI.130), the most surprising
building of his. It dates from 1905, and its crisp, glass-vaulted banking
hall is the first full realization of his own preaching of ten vears earlier.

129. Loos: Steiner House, Vienna, 1910.

Historically speaking, it is as free of period inspiration on the one hand
and of Art Nouveau on the other as any contemporary buildings of
Hoffmann and Loos in Austria, of Wright in America, and of Garnier
and Perret in France.

In Germany the most important architect during those years was
Peter Behrens'* (1868-1940). Characteristically of the situation about
1900, he began as a painter and underwent the ‘moral’ reformation
towards the applied arts, before he trained as an architect. The applied
arts, when Behrens started, meant Art Nouveau. He soon escaped from
its enervating atmosphere. His first building, his own house in
Darmstadt (1901), already shows a hardening of the tender curves of
Art Nouveau.'" In the same year, Behrens designed a type face in which
the change is complete. The curves are straightened, and ornamental
initials are decorated with squares and circles only. A comparison

130. Wagner: Post Office Savings Bank, Vienna, 1905.

between Behrens’s first type face and Eckmann’s (1900) is historically
very instructive.?° Again this new simplicity was brought about under
English influence. The Doves Press stands at the beginning of German
twentieth-century printing. Honesty and saneness became the ideals
that replaced the sultry dreams of Art Nouveau aesthetics,

Behrens was not alone in this revulsion from Art Nouveau. Its earliest
witness in Germany seems to be the flat designed by R.A. Schréder
(1878-1962), a poet and decorator and a founder of the Insel Verlag,
for his cousin Alfred Walter von Heymel (1878-1914), also a poet
and also a founder of the Insel Verlag. The flat was in Berlin and
dates from 1899 (Pl.131).*! Here for the first time — even if perhaps
not without some inspiration from the hieratic stiffness of some
Mackintosh furniture - are chairs without curves, and walls, ceilings,
and fireplaces divided into simple rectangular geometric patterns,

In Behrens’s buildings from 1904 onwards the same new somewhat
classicist spirit is expressed in the exteriors. Take for instance the Art
Building at an exhibition held at Oldenburg in 1905 (P1.132) and com-
pare it with Olbrich’s Sezession. In Behrens’s design the florid cupola

ia hae cto. ‘

2 i

31. Schréder: Apartment for A. W. von Heymel, Berlin, 1899.

and the curved cornice have disappeared. The centrepiece and the outer
pavilions have roofs of pyramidal form - a motif incidentally taken
over by Olbrich in his exhibition buildings at Darmstadt in 1907-8
(Pl. 125) - the rest of the building has flat roofs. Walls without windows
are decorated with delicate lines forming oblong panels and squares.
The porch has been left completely bare, just two square posts and a
square lintel.??

This indicates the direction in which Behrens was to develop during
the years that followed. His principal buildings before the war he de-
signed for the AEG, one of the big German electrical combines, of
which the managing director, P. Jordan, had appointed him architect
and adviser, In 1909 the turbine factory was built, perhaps the most
beautiful industrial building ever erected up to that time (P1.133). The
steel frame is clearly exhibited ; wide, perfectly spaced glass panes replace
the walls on the side and in the middle of the ends; and if the corners
are still expressed by heavy stone with banded rustication and rounded
at the angles, the metal frame projecting its sharp corners above these
stone pylons redresses the balance boldly and effectively. This design

132. Behrens: Art Building, Oldenburg Exhibition, 1905.

has nothing in common with the ordinary factories of that time, not
even the most functional American ones of Albert Kahn with their ex-
posed steel frames. Here for the first time the imaginative possibilities
of industrial architecture were visualized. The result is a pure work of
architecture, so finely balanced that the huge dimensions are scarcely
realized, unless one looks at the people in the street for comparison.
The two-storeyed aisle on the left has the flat roof and the row of
windows which we find in all the most advanced works of that time.

The factory for the production of small electric motors was built in
1911 ‘Pl, 134). The proportions of that part of the building which is to
be seen on the left, its rows of rather narrow high windows without
any mouldings, are reminiscent of the factory of 1909 and more rem-
iniscent of Schinkel’s, than of Hoffmann’s or Loos’s favourite pro-
portions, The same strength and noble vigour are expressed in the
composition of the main block with its round-fronted pillars and
recessed windows.

And while Behrens was employed on such monumental tasks, he
managed to spend the same amount of care and thought on improve-
ments in the design of small things for everyday use and larger things
of so utilitarian a kind that they had never before been regarded as works
of art at all. An example of the first is the excellent tea-kettle brought
out in 1910 (PI. 135), an example of the second the street lamps of 1907-8
(Pl. 136). They show the same purity of form, the same sobriety in

134. Behrens: Factory, Volrastrasse, Berlin, Igtl.

limiting the design to simple geometrical forms, and the same beauty
of proportion which delight us in Behrens’s buildings,

The solidarity of the Deutscher Werkbund with this attitude of
Behrens’s is a matter of course. It has already been reported that the
Werkbund was founded in 1907. Behrens had become adviser to the
AEG in the same year. One year earlier the Deutsche Werkstatten, as
we have also seen before, had shown their first machine-made furniture
at an exhibition in Dresden. By the time the Werkbund brought out its
first Annual, that is by 1912, they could without effort show well over a
hundred illustrations of works of industrial design as well as architecture
in the style of which they approved. Both the Deutsche Werkstatten
and the AEG appeared in its pages, and Riemerschmid, and Josef
Hoffmann, and also Gropius. But before passing on to Gropius’s work,
a few words must be said about some early buildings by two or three
other German architects, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe®? was born in
1886, Hans Poelzig** in 1869 (he died in 1948), Max Berg in 1870.
Max Berg (1870-1947) in his Jahrhunderthalie at Breslau in 1910-12
(Pl. 137) did with reinforced concrete what Behrens had done with steel
framing. He created a noble monumentality without concealing the
boldness of his structure. The Jahrhunderthalle covered an area of
nearly 21,000 square feet with a weight of 4200 tons, whereas for
instance the dome of St Peter’s in Rome has an area of 5250 square feet
and needs a weight of about 10,000 tons to cover it. Moreover, the
supports have an elegance of span and curvature heralding the achieve-
ments of Pier Luigi Nervi after the Second World War.

Mies van der Rohe and Poelzig represent two opposite modes of self-
expression in terms of the twentieth-century style. Mies van der Rohe’s
design of 1912 for the house of Mrs Krdller-Miiller (Pl. 138) is evidently
derived from Behrens, but also, though perhaps less evidently, from
Schinkel, who has had to be mentioned in these pages more than once
before, and who was just then being rediscovered and reappreciated.?®
From hina come Mies’s sparseness and extreme precision, from him
and Behrens his sense of cubic relations.

Mies’s Kréller House has a permanence even in the drawing and a
convincing monumentality which makes Poelzig’s office building in

135. Behrens: Electric tea-kettle
for the AEG, 1910.

136. Behrens: Street lamps for the AEG, 1907-8.

Pee BE=

137. Berg: Centenary Hall, Breslau, 1910-12.

Breslau of 1911 (Pl. 139) look as if it were surging ponderously towards
us, These thick bands curving round the corner are of great dynamic
power, in spite of their somewhat elephantine detail, and a very personal
statement. And although Poelzig’s next building of importance, a
chemical factory at Luban in Silesia (Pl. 140), designed in ror, is much
more elegant and refined, its contrast of semicircular and strangely
spaced small square windows is again personal to the verge of
caprice.

The inventiveness and the vein of fantasy in these buildings made
Poelzig the leader of German architectural Expressionism in the first
years after the First World War, when this riotous style culminated in

138. Mies van der Rohe: Design for a house for Mrs Kréller-Miiller, 1912.

3 ~~

139. Poelzig: Office building, Breslau, r9rr.

painting and sculpture ds well as in architecture. His Grosses Schau-
spielhaus dates from 1919. It was in the same years that Erich Mendelsohn
(1887-1953) took up the motif of the curved fagade and the bands of
windows sweeping round corners and made them into an effective tool
of Expressionism, The motif dominates his Einstein Tower of rg21
and in a more rational treatment his somewhat later designs for stores.
It became one of the most popular motifs of the years between the
First and Second World Wars and can be made responsible for much
of that functionally unjustified but emotionally justifiable bogus stream-
lining which went on in refrigerators, prams, and many other industrially
produced objects.

The Modern Movement in architecture, in order to be fully expressive
of the twentieth century, had to possess both qualities, the faith in
science and technology, in social science and rational planning, and the
romantic faith in speed and the roar of machines, We have seen in
Chapter 1 how the one set of values was appreciated by Muthesius, the
Werkbund, and finally Gropius’s Bauhaus, the other by the Italian
Futurists and by Sant’Elia, their architectural precursor rather than
representative. It is the same in architecture. Sant’Elia’s drawings and
Gropius’s first buildings stand for the two interpretations of the new
metropolitan, technological civilization of the twentieth century. A
decision had to be taken between the two, as soon as the First World
War was over, and a decision has still or again to be taken now.

The structures on Sant’Elia’s drawings which are not precisely dat-
able but must belong to the years 1912-14 or 1913-14 (Pls. 141, 142,
143) are immensely impressive. They mean factories, power stations,
railway stations, skyscrapers along two- or more-level roads. The sweep
of the architect’s pen, the sweep of the sheer verticals or the closely
banded curved fronts of towers, all this is highly original, highly inven-
tive, and heady with the passion for the great city and its machine-
propelled traffic. The source of the forms is no doubt the Vienna of the
Sezession; the only parallels in reality are Poelzig’s office building of
1911 and Mendelsohn’s drawings of the same years. A connexion
between Sant’Elia and Mendelsohn seems at least probable.

How Sant’Elia, who died when he was no more than twenty-nine

140. Poelzig: Chemical factory, Luban, 1911-12.

years old, would have coped with real buildings, we do not know. Nor
do those built in later years by Mario Chiattone (died 1957), his only
Italian fellow-architect and fellow-Futurist of similar ideals, give us a
clue.?® Chiattone’s designs of about 1914 (P1.144) are as astonishingly
prophetic of the twenties as Sant’Elia’s, and perhaps a little less
Utopian. Sant’Elia in his sketches shows no interest in plans and the pre-
cise function of a building. They are sheer Expressionism. His passion
for the Great City was no more realistic than Gautier’s for metallic
architecture or Turner’s for steam and speed. From Sant’Elia the way
of twentieth-century architecture leads once more to Expressionism, in-
cluding Le Corbusier’s first dream city for three million people (1922).
The real solid achievement had its source not in Sant’Elia, not in
Poelzig and Mendelsohn, but in Behrens and his great pupil Walter
Gropius (born in 1883). Almost immediately after he had left Behrens’s
office, in 1911, he was commissioned to build a factory at Alfeld on the
Leine (Fagus-Fabrik, P1145). His designs go distinctly beyond those
by Behrens for the AEG. Only small details such as the windows on the
right of the main block show Behrens’s influence. As for the main block

itself, everything is new and full of stimulating ideas. For the first time
a complete facade is conceived in glass. The supporting piers are re-
duced to narrow mullions of brick. The corners are left without any
support, a treatment which has since been imitated over and over again,
The expression of the flat roof has also changed. Only in the building by
Loos which was done one year before the Fagus Factory, have we seen
the same feeling for the pure cube. Another exceedingly important
quality of Gropius’s building is that, thanks to the large expanses of
clear glass, the usual hard separation of exterior and interior is anni-
hilated. Light and air can pass freely through the walls so that the
closed-in space is no longer different in essence from the great universe
of space outside. This ‘etherealization’ of architecture, as Frank Lloyd
Wright had called it in 1901,”" is one of the most characteristic features
of the new style. We have seen it develop in the usual ground plan of
late-nineteenth-century office buildings, where the supporting steel
girders made all the partition walls easily removable, and then in
Wright’s ground plans of private houses, in the arrangement of the
rooms in Perret’s house of 1903, and in Mackintosh’s entrancing vistas ;
and we may recognize its counterpart in the field of planning in the
move from the town to a whole province, which was made in Germany
immediately after the First World War (Landesplanung, Ruhr District,
1920). Here too it is the conquest of space, the spanning of great dis-
tances, the rational co-ordination of heterogeneous functions that fas~
cinates architects. The profound affinity of this passion for planning
with the characteristics of the twentieth-century style in architecture
and with the eternal concern of Western architecture with the conquest
of space is evident. The new style in the form Gropius gave it takes its
place in the procession which leads from the Romanesque and the
Gothic to the Renaissance of Brunelleschi and Alberti and the Baroque
of Borromini and Neumann. The warmth and directness with which
ages of craft and a more personal relation between architect and client
endowed buildings of the past may have gone for good. The architect,
to represent this century of ours, must be colder, cold to keep in com-
mand of mechanized production, cold to design for the satisfaction of
anonymous clients,

146. Gropius and Meyer: Model Factory, Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne,
1914. North Side.

However, genius will find its own way even in times of overpowering
collective energy, even within the medium of this new style of the
twentieth century which, because it is a genuine style as opposed to a
passing fashion, is universal. For the Werkbund Exhibition of 1914,
Gropius built a small model factory. The north side (Pl.146) is his
comment on his master’s turbine factory of five years before. The re-
duction of motifs to an absolute minimum and the sweeping simplifica-
tion of outline are patent. The replacement of Behrens’s heavy corner
piers by thin metallic lines is specially impressive. Bolder still is the
south front (Pl.147) with the superb contrast between the decidedly
Wrightian brick centre and the completely glazed corners, In the middle
there are only the narrowest slits for the windows and the lowest en-
trance; at the corner, where according to all standards of the past, a
sufficient-looking supporting force should show itself, there is nothing
but glass encasing transparently two spiral staircases.

The motif has since been imitated as often as the girderless corner
of the Fagus Factory; and it shows that Gropius’s personal expression

147. Gropius and Meyer: Model Factory. Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne,
1914. South Side.

by no means lacks grace. There is something sublime in this effortless
mastery of material and weight. Never since the Sainte-Chapelle and
the choir of Beauvais had the human art of building been so triumphant
over matter. Yet the character of the new buildings is entirely un-Gothic,

anti-Gothic, While in the thirteenth century all lines, functional though
they were, served the one artistic purpose of pointing heavenwards to
a goal beyond this world, and walls were made translucent to carry the
transcendental magic of saintly figures rendered in coloured glass, the
glass walls are now clear and without mystery, the steel frame is hard,
and its expression discourages all other-worldly speculation. It is the
creative energy of this world in which we live and work and which we
want to master, a world of science and technology, of speed and danger,
of hard struggles and no personal security, that is glorified in Gropius’s
architecture, and as long as this is the world and these are its ambitions
and problems, the style of Gropius and the other pioneers will be valid.
The forty years since the First World War called a halt have seen its
triumph. Expressionism was a short interlude, following early Gropius
and preceding the mature Gropius of the Bauhaus buildings at Dessau,
the mature Le Corbusier of the villas of the mid twenties, and the
mature Mies van der Rohe of the German exhibition pavilion at
Barcelona, We are now in the middle of a second such interlude, the one
for which Le Corbusier (with such recent buildings as the pilgrimage
chapel of Ronchamp) and the Brazilians are responsible. Like Gaudi
between Sullivan and Behrens, Loos and the others of after 1900, like
Expressionism between the Fagus and the Bauhaus buildings, so late
Le Corbusier and the structural acrobatics of the Brazilians and all
those who imitate them or are inspired by them are attempts to satisfy
the craving of architects for individual expression, the craving of the
public for the surprising and fantastic, and for an escape out of reality
into a fairy world. Yet architects as well as clients must know that
today’s reality, exactly as that of 1914, can find its complete expression
only in the style created by the giants of that by now distant past.
Society has not changed since, industrialization has expanded,
anonymity of the client has not been overcome, anonymity of archi-
tectural design has increased, The whims of individual architects, the
strokes of genius of others cannot be accepted as an answer to the serious
questions which it is the responsibility of the architect to answer.
Whether his answer ought to differ from that of the pioneers of 1914,
and in what way it ought to differ, it is not for this book to decide.

eC Oda Ane

Notes

1+ Theories of Art from Morris to Gropius

. Ruskin, John. Architecture and Painting. Addenda to Lectures I and II,

Library Edition, xii, 1904, p. 83.
Ruskin, John. The Seven Lamps of Architecture, New York, 1849, p. 7.
Scot, Sir George Gilbert. Remarks on Secular and Domestic Architecture,
London, 1858, p. 221.

. Scott, Sir George Gilbert. Personal and Professional Recollections, London,

1879, pp. 117ff.

. Cf Mackail, J.W. The Life of William Morris, London, 1899. Reissued

in the World’s Classics, O.U.P., 1950. Morris’s Collected Works were
edited by May Morris and published in 1910-15, May Morris added to
them two volumes of biography: William Morris, Artist, Writer, Socialist,
1936. Morris's letters were published by P. Henderson, London, 1950. He
quotes more literature in his foreword. Recently the pace of work on
Morris has quickened, thanks to the foundation of the William Morris
Society in London.

. Mackail, op. cit., ii, p. 80.

. The Collected Works of William Morris, London, 1915, xxiii, p. 147.
. Ibid., 1914, xxii, p. 26.

~ Mackail, op. cit., ii, p. 99.

. Coll. Works, xxii, p. 425 xxiii, p. 173.

. Ibid., xxii, pp. 47, 50, §8, 73, 80, etc.

10.
« Coll. Works, xxii, p. 47.
12.
13.
14,
15.
16,

Mackail, op. cit., i, p. 186.

Mackail, op. cit., ii, p. 106.
Coll. Works, xxiii, pp. 194, 201.
Mackail, op. cit., ii, p. 105.
Tbid., p. 144; i, p. 305.

Coll. Works, xxii, p. 75.

219

17.

Lethaby, W.R. Philip. Webb and His Works, Oxford, 1935, p. 94. One of
the first to notice this contradiction was Morris’s earliest French follower,
Henri Cazalis (1840-1909), who wrote under the pseudonym Jean Lahor,

Cf. Lahor, Jean. W. Morris et le mouvement nouveau de l'art décoratif,

, Geneva, 1897, pp. 41-2.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.

220

Walton, T. ‘A French disciple of William Morris ‘“‘Jean Lahor”’.’ Revue
de littérature comparée, 1935, Pp. $24-35.
Coll. Works, xxii, pp. 335-6.
Ibid., pp. 352, 3563 xxiii, p. 179.
Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. Catalogue of the first exhibition.
London, 1888, p. 7.
The Nationa] Association for the Advancement of Art and its Application
to Industry. Transactions, Liverpool Meeting, 1888, London, 1888, p. 216.
Crane, Walter. The Claims of Decorative Art, London, 1892, p. 75.
Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. Catalogue of the third exhibition,
London, 1890, p. 8.
Crane, op. cit., p. 6.
Ibid., pp. 76, 65.
Cf. Pevsner, Nikolaus. ‘William Morris, C.R.Ashbee und das zwanzigste
Jahrhundert.’ Deutsche Vierteljahrsschrift fiir Literaturwissenschaft und
Geistesgeschichte, xiv, 1936, pp. 536ff., published in a translation in
Manchester Review, vii, 1956, pp. 437 ff.
Ashbee, Charles R. 4 Few Chapters on Workshop Reconstruction and
Citizenship, London, 1894, pp. 16, 24.
Idem. An Endeavour totcards the Teachings of #. Ruskin and W. Morris,
London, 1901, p. 47.
Idem. Craftsmanship in Competitive Industry, Campden, Glos., 1908, p. 194.
Idem. Should We Stop Teaching Art? London, 1911, p. 4; Where the Great
City Stands, London, 1917, p. 3.
Day, Lewis F. Everyday Art: Short Essays on the Arts Not-Fine, London,
1882, pp. 273-4.
Sedding, John D. Art and Handicraft, London, 1893, pp. 128-9.
Above all Lethaby; cf. his lectures on Modern German Architecture and
on Design and Industry, delivered in 1915: ‘Up to twenty years ago there
had been a very remarkable development of English art in all kinds... .
Then... there came a timid reaction and the re-emergence of the catalogued
“styles”... German advances ... have been founded on the English Arts
and Crafts. They saw the essence of our best essays in furniture, glass,
textiles, printing, and all the rest....” Form in Civilization, London, 1922,
pp. 46ff. and 96ff. Cf. also Ashbee who, in his Should We Stop Teaching
Art?, p. 4, says that since about 1900 the growth of the English movement

34.
35-
36.
37-

38.
39.
40.

4i.
42.

43.

44.
45.

‘has been arrested, and its principles are now more consistently and
logically studied in Germany and America’.

Wilde, Oscar. Essays and Lectures, London, 4th ed., 1913, p. 178.
Wagner, Otto. Moderne Architektur, Vienna, 1896, p. 95.

Loos, Adolf. Ins Leere gesprochen, 1897-1900, Innsbruck, 1932, p. 18.
Van de Velde, Henri. Die Renaissance ti modernen Kunstgewerbe, Berlin,
I9OI, p. 23.

Sullivan, Louis. Kindergarten Chats, New York, 1947. They were first
serialized in the Interstate Architect and Builder, 8 February Igor to 16
February 1902.

Ibid., p. 187.

Op. cit., p. 2.

vili, 1898-9.

My attention was drawn to this article by a remark in Carroll L.V. Meeks,
The Architectural Development of the American Railroad Station,
Dissertation, Harvard University, 1948, published in an altered form as
The Railroad Station, Yale University Press and London, 1956. Sturgis’s
article may have formed the direct source for Henry James's description
of his Great Good Place as ‘a great square fair chamber all beautified by
omissions’. The Great Good Place was published in 1900 (see Novels and
Stories, new and complete edition, xxi, 1922, p. 221).

Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. Catalogue of the second exhibition.
London, 1889, p. 7.

Studio, i, p. 234.

The first of them was delivered in that adventurous club of young Belgian
artists which was originally called Les Vingt, and since 1894 La Libre
Esthétique. Cf. Madeleine Octave Maus, Trente annces de lutte pour Part,
1884-1914, Brussels, 1926. Van de Velde’s lectures are collected in two
books: Kunstgewerbliche Laienpredigten, Leipzig, 1902, and Die Renatssunce
um modernen Kunstgewerbe, Leipzig, 1903. Maus, op. cit., p. 183, gives
1894 as the date of the first lecture, van de Velde, 1890, The latter date
seems highly improbable, because we know from van de Velde’s biography
that he had a nervous breakdown in 1889 and did not really recover until
1893 (Osthaus, Karl Ernst. P’an de Velde, Hagen, 1920, p. 10). Moreover,
he admitted that he and his friends knew nothing of the English Arts and
Crafts before 1891 (Die Renaissance... , p. 61). As early as 1gOI critics
complained of inaccuracies in van de Velde’s historical accounts
(Dekorative Kunst, vii, 1900 1, p. 376). Van de Velde had for years before his
death in 1957 worked on his autobiography. The part of it dealing with
these crucial years was published in the Architcetural Revtets, exit, 19§2, pp.
¥43ff. But there also chronology is somewhat vague. Van de Velde writes

221

46.
47.

48.

49.

50.

5.

52.

34.

55.

56.

57-
58.

59.

60.

61,
62.

63.

64.
65.
66.

67.

68.

69.
70.

222

indeed himself: ‘I leave it to others to determine the order of their respective
dates.’ What is now certain is that the important lecture called Déblatement
dart was published in La Société nouvelle, and that van de Velde had
given some lectures on Modern Industrial Art at the Royal Academy of
Art at Antwerp in 1893 (letter of 23 June 1952, from M.Schiltz, the
administrator of the academy).

Van de Velde, Die Renatssance..., p. 98.

Idem. .. . Latenpredigten, p. 36.

Idem. Die Renaissance. .. , pp. 30, 111-12.

Idem. .. . Laienpredigten, p. 172.

Idem. Die Renatssance. .. , pp. 12, I11.

Ibid., p. 110. This is identical with the principles of industrial art put
forward by the Deutscher Werkbund (see Chapter 7) and later by the
British Design and Industries Association founded in 1915: fitness for use,
and honesty towards materials and working processes.

Idem. ... Latenpredigten, p. 166. How strikingly topical is this statement,
if one replaces cement by concrete, and celluloid by plastics.

. Idem. Die Renaissance... , p. 36.

Ibid., p. gr.
Kulka, Heinrich. Adolf Loos: das Werk des Architekten, Vienna, 1931,
p. 11. Recently Casabella has dedicated a whole number to Loos: No. 233,
Nov. 1959.
Wagner, Otto. Moderne Architertur, Vienna, 1896.
Lux, J. A. Orto Wagner, Munich, 1914.
Wagner, op. cit., p. 8.
Tbid., p. 37.
Tbid., p. 41.
Ibid., p. 37.
Tbid., p. 99.
Loos, op. cit. His writings after 1900 were printed in a volume called
Trotzdem, 1900-1930, Innsbruck, 1931.
Idem. Ins Leere gesprochen, p. 66. In 1908 Loos wrote an article called
‘Ornament and Crime’, which was reprinted in Trotzdem, pp. 79ff.
Idem. Ins Leere gesprochen, p. 49.
Ibid., p. 58.
Ibid., p. 78.
Reprinted in Wright, Frank Lloyd. Modern Architecture, Princeton, 1931,
pp. 7ff.
Tbid., p. 8.
Ibid., p. 20.
Ibid., p. 8.

71.
72.
73.
TA.
75-

76.

77.
78.

79.
80.
81.

82.

83.
84.
85.

86.
87.

88.

TIbid., p. 16.

Ibid., p. 15.

Ibid., p. 14.

Ibid., p. 20.

Address at the First International Congress of Architects, quoted from
Giedion, Sigfried, Space, Time and Architecture, Cambridge, Mass., 1941,
p. 151.

Berlage, H.P. “Over Architectuur.’ Tzveemaandelijk Tijdschrift, ii, part 1,
1896, pp. 233-4. Dr H. Gerson was kind enough to look up for me the
exact words of Berlage’s text.

Berlage, H.P. Gedanken iiber Stil in der Baukunst, Leipzig, 1905, p. 48.
Cf. many quotations in Schmalenbach, Fritz, Jugendstil, Wiirzburg, 1935,
a very useful book, which describes minutely the history of the decorative
arts in Germany between 1895 and 1902.

Graul, Richard. Die Krisis im Kunstgewerbe, Leipzig, 1901, p. 2.
Muthesius, Hermann. ‘Kunst und Maschine.’ Dekorative Kunst, ix, 1901-2,

Pp. 141 ff.

Idem. Sttlarchitektur und Baukunst, Miilheim-Ruhr, 1902, pp. 50, $1,
53.

Lichtwark, Alfred. Palastfenster und Fligeltiir, Berlin, 1899, pp. 128, 144,
169.

Idem, Makartbouguet und Blumenstrauss, Munich, 1894.
Obrist, Hermann. ‘Neue Méglichkeiten in der bildenden Kunst.’ Kunstwart,
XVi, part 2, 1903, p. 21.
Schifer, W. ‘Die neue Kunstgewerbeschule in Diisseldorf.’ Die Rheinlande,
1903, pp. 62-3.
Naumann, Friedrich. ‘Die Kunst im Zeitalter der Maschine.” Kunstzart,
xvii, part 2, 1904, p. 323.
See recently E. Pfeiffer-Belli in Werk und Zeit, vii, December 1959.
I am very grateful to Professor H.Rettig of Dresden and Herr Heinz
Thiersch of Munich for having drawn my attention to the importance of
Riemerschmid which had remained unrecognized by me when I first
wrote this book, On Riemerschmid see Rettig, H., Baumeister, XLV, 1948,
and Bauen und Wohnen, UI, 1948. Two other architects equally keenly
interested in machine-made furniture during these early years were
Adelbert Niemeyer and Karl Bertsch who had joined the circle of the
Deutsche Werkstatten from the Miinchner Werkstatten. By 1910 Baillie
Scott, Josef Hoffmann, Kolo Moser, and a number of others also worked
occasionally for the Werksratten.
Cf. Popp, J. Die Deutschen Werkstdtten. Written about 1923, typescript. I
am greatly indebted to the late Karl Schmidt for kindly letting me

223

89.

90.
91.
92.
93-

94.
95.

96.

97-

98.

99.

100.

101.

224

read the typescript and lending me a series of photographs of D.W.
furniture.

‘Der Bund will eine Auslese der besten in Kunst, Industrie, Handwerk und
Handel tatigen Krafte vollziehen. Er will zusammenfassen, was in Quali-
tatsleistung und Streben in der gewerblichen Arbett vorhanden ist. Er bildet
den Sammelpunkt fir alle, welche zur Qualitatsleistung befahigt und gewillt
sind.’ On the history of the Werkbund cf. Finfzig Jahre Deutscher Werk-
bund, Berlin, 1958; also Die Form, vii, 1932, pp. 297-324.

Ibid., p. 302.

Tbid., p. 310.

The Beginnings of a Journal of the D.I.A., 1916, p. 6.

Pevsner, Nikolaus. Academies of Art, Past and Present, London (Cambridge
U.P.) 1940, pp. 267, 281 ff.

Die Form, loc. cit., pp. 316, 317.

On Sant’Elia much has been published in the last years. Until then the
standard literature had been: Sartoris, Alberto, L’Architetto Antonio
Sanv’Elia, Milan, 1930; Argan, G.C., ‘Il pensiero critico di Antonio
Sant’Elia’, L Arte, xxxiii, 1930; and the same and others, Dopo Sant’Elia,
Milan, 1935. The new contributions started with Banham, R., Architectural
Review, cxvii, 1955, who found a large number of hitherto unpublished
and unconsidered drawings at Como, followed immediately by Tentori, F.,
and Mariani, L., L’ Architettura, i, 1955-6, pp. 206ff. and 704ff. Then G.
Bernasconi joined in and published Sant’Elia’s Messaggio for the first time
(Rivista Tecnica della Svizzera Italiana, xiii, 1956, No. 7). After that
Banham, R., Architectural Review, cxix, 1956, p. 343; Banham R., in
Fournal of the R. Inst. of Brit. Architects, 3rd series, lxiv, 1957; Zevi, B.
in L’ Architettura, ii, 1956-7, pp. 476ff.3 and Mariani, L., ibid’, iv, 1958-9,
p. 841.

The translation is from Dr R.P.Banham’s Theory and Design in the First
Machine Age, London, 1960, which I was privileged to use before pub-
lication.

This was never published. Letter of W.Gropius to the author, 16 January
1936.

Letter of W.Gropius to the author, 16 January 1936.

Cf. William Morris: ‘The synonym for applied art is architecture.’ National
Association for the Advancement of Art and its Application to Industry,
Transactions, Edinburgh Meeting, 1889, London, 1890, p. 192.

Gropius, Walter. The New Architecture and the Bauhaus, New York
(Museum of Modern Art), 1936.

Gropius, Walter, et al. Staathches Bauhaus in Weimar, 1919-23. Weimar,
ad. p. 8.

2 From Eighteen-fifty-one to Morris and the
Arts and Crafts

. On the Exhibition of 1851 see Hobhouse, C., 1851 and the Crystal Palace,

London, ist ed., 1937; ffrench, Y., The Great Exhibition, London, 1951;
and with specific reference to the problems with which this book is con-
cerned, Pevsner, N., High Victorian Design, London, 1951. Attention must
also be drawn to the Catalogue of an Exhibition of Victorian and Edwardian
Decorative Arts, London (Victoria & Albert Museum), 1952, for which
the late Peter Floud was chiefly responsible.

. The Principal Speeches and Addresses of H.R.H. the Prince Consort, London,

1862, pp. IIo, ITT.

. The Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations, 1851, London,

1851, introductory volume, p. 1.

. Cf. J. F. and Barbara Hammond, The Town Labourer, 1760-1832, the New

Civilization, London, 1917, who quote some typical sayings of members of
the upper class in defending their unscrupulous attitude with the weapons
of Utilitarian philosophy: ‘Trade, industry and barter always find their own
level’ (Pitt). ‘By following the dictates of their own interests, landowners
and farmers become, in the natural order of things, the best trustees
and guardians for the public’ (Rep. H. Comm. Poor Laws, 1827).

. The importance of this group for the reform of design was first seen by

Sigfried Giedion in Mechanization takes Command, first edition 1948. When
Professor Giedion’s book came out, I had also been working on them, and
my results went into the following two books: Matthew Digby Wyatt,
London (Cambridge U-P.), 1950 (Inaugural Lecture, Cambridge, 1949),
and High Victorian Design, see above. Since then the group has been treated
in more detail by A. Boe, From Gothic Revival to Functional Form, Oslo,
1957 (B. Litt. Thesis, Oxford, 1954).

. The following is based on my High Victorian Design, pp. 146ff. Page

references to the quotations from Pugin are given there.

. Journal of Design and Manufactures, vi, 1852, p. 110.
. In his lase article Peter Floud commented on the development of Morris’s

textiles: Architectural Revietw, cxxvi, 1959.

. Mackail, J.W. The Life of William Morris, London, 1899, ii, p. 5.
10,

Mackail says (loc. cit., ti, p. 272): ‘Sir Edward Burne-Jones told me that
Morris would have liked the faces in his pictures less highly finished, and
less charged with the concentrated meaning of emotion of the painting. As
with the artists of Greece and of the Middle Ages, the human face was to
him merely a part, though no doubt a very important part, of the human
body.”

225

Il.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Pp wen

Pevsner, Nikolaus. ‘Christopher Dresser, Industrial Designer.’ Archi-

tectural Review, \xxxi, 1937, pp. 183-6.

Two examples are in the Victoria and Albert Museum (C. 788-1925, a

plate, and C. 295-1926, a bottle), and neither is in any respect superior to

other English artistic pottery of that time.

Blomfield, Sir Reginald. Richard Norman Shaw, R.A., London, 1940.
Pevsner, Nikolaus. ‘Richard Norman Shaw, 1831-1912’ in Victorian

Architecture (ed. Ferriday, P.), London, 1963.

Hitchcock, Henry-Russell. The Architecture of H. H. Richardson and his

Times, New York (Museum of Modern Art), 2nd ed., 1961.

A Monograph of the Work of McKim, Mead and White, 1879-1915, New

York, 1915-19, i, Also Scully, V. J. The Shingle Style, New Haven, 1955.

3° Eighteen-ninety in Painting

. Vollard, Ambroise. Renoir, an Intimate Record, New York, 1925, p. 129.

. Gasquet, Joachim. Cézanne, Paris, 1921, p. 46.

. Cézanne, Paul. Letzers, London, 1941, p. 234.

. Van Gogh, Vincent. Letters to Emile Bernard, New York (Museum of
Modern Art), 1938, p. 51.

. Further Letters of Vincent van Gogh to his Brother, 1886-1889, London, 1929,
P. 174.

. Ibid,, p. 171.

. Ibid., p. 166. It is interesting to see that certain remarks of Cézanne point
to the same idea. He refused to paint Clemenceau because he could not
help imagining ‘bitter blue and poisonous yellow’ and ‘convulsive lines’ as
soon as he began thinking of him. He accounts for this by saying: ‘This
man does not believe in God.’ Gasquet, op. cit., p. 118.

. Further Letters... , p. 384.

9. Ibid., pp. 332, 413.
10. Ibid., p. 203.

il.

12.
13.

For all that concerns Gauguin and the other early French Post-Impres-
sionists, except Cézanne, see now J. Rewald, Post-Impressionism, from
van Gogh to Gauguin, New York (Museum of Modern Art), n.d. (1956).
Cf. Fegdal, Charles. Félix Vallotton, Paris, 1931.
Cf. Sponsel, Jean Louis. Das moderne Plakat, Dresden, 1897.

Price, Charles Matlack. Posters, New York, 1913.

Kauffer, E. McKnight. The Art of the Poster, London, 1924.

Koch, R. ‘ Art Nouveau Posters.’ Gazerte des beaux arts, 6th ser.,], 1957.

14. Jamot, Paul. Maurice Dents, Paris, 1945.

226

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

Rewald, op. cit., p. 446.
Koch, R. Marsyas, v, 1950-53.
Plasschaert, A. Jan Toorop, Amsterdam, 1925.
Knipping, J.B. Jan Toorop, Amsterdam, 1945.
Dekorative Kunst, i, 1898. Quoted from Madsen, S.T., Sources of Art
Nouveau, Oslo, 1956, p. 199.
Cf. Bahr, Hermann. Die Uberwindung des Naturalismus, Berlin, 1891.
Maeterlinck was a friend of Toorop.

4° Art Nouveau

. Schmutzler, R. ‘The English Sources of Art Nouveau’, Architectural

Review, cxvii, 1955, and ‘Blake and Art Nouveau’, Architectural Review,
cxviii, 1955. Also Pevsner, N., ‘Beautiful and, if need be, useful’,
Architectural Review, cxxii, 1957. This is a review of Madsen, Stefan
Tschudi, Sources of Art Nouveau, Oslo, 1956, for the time being the
standard work on its subject. Another review of the same book which is
worth studying is that by J.M. Jacobus Jr in Art Bulletin, xl, 1958,
Pp. 362. Very useful is the Art Nouveau bibliography compiled by J. Grady
(Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, xiv, 1955), but Madsen’s
book has a long bibliography too. Mackmurdo was introduced to art
history by Pevsner, N., Architectural Review, Ixxxiii, 1938. On the typo-
graphical aspects of Mackmurdo’s titlespage, see Baurmann, R., ‘Art
Nouveau Script’, Architectural Review, cxxiii, 1958. On Art Nouveau in
genera] a symposium came out in Germany in 1959, too late to be made
use of here: Jugendstil, der Weg ins 20. Jahrhundert, edited by H. Seling,
Heidelberg and Munich, 1959.

. See his decoration of a porch and staircase at Chalfont St Peter of 1888.

Illustrated in the British Architect, xxxiii, 1890, pp. 26-7.

. A case in point is Alfred Gilbert, the sculptor, in whose Fountain of Eros

in Piccadilly Circus, of 1892, Arts and Crafts innovations and personal
Baroque leanings merge into a very personal Art Nouveau.

. Cf. The Early Work of Aubrey Beardsley, London, 1899, and The Later Work

of Aubrey Beardsley, London, 1901. Recently Reade, B. Aubrey Beardsley,
London, 1966.

. Yet he may still have been impressed cven at that time by some such

works of Rossetti as the wood engravings to Moxon’s edition of Tennyson's
Poems (London, 1857) - especially The Ludy of Shallott, p. 75, and The
Palace of Art, p. 113.

. On Sullivan see: Morrison, Hugh. Louis Suilivan, New York (Museum of

Modern Art), 1935.
227

Io.
Tk.

12.

13.

14.

15.

228

Hope, Henry R. ‘Louis Sullivan’s Architecturat Ornament.’ Magazine
of Art, xl, 1947, Pp. 110-17 (reprinted in the Architectural Review, cii,
1947, Pp. 111-14).

Szarkowski, J. The Idea of Louis Sullivan, New York and London, 1957.

. Sullivan. Kindergarten Chats, p. 189.
. Ina letter to the author, dated 23 January 1936, he said that his only

intention in designing No. 6 rue Paul-Emile Janson was ‘de faire euvre
personnelle d’architecte, a Végale du peintre et du sculpteur qui ne souctatent
que de voir avec leurs yeux et sentir avec leur coeur... , though at the same
time he stressed the rational plan and construction of the house. He added
that Voysey and Beardsley were unknown to him when he designed his early
works. Toorop he did not mention. The most scholarly publication on Horta
is Madsen, S.T., Architectural Review, cxviii, 1955. Cf. also the eight fully
illustrated features in L’ Architettura, iii, 1957-8, pp. 334, 408, 479, 548,622,
698, 766, 836; Kaufmann, Edgar, Architects’ Year Book, viii, 1957 and, yet
more recently, R. L. Delevoy, Victor Horta, Brussels, 1958.

. Van de Velde. Die Renatssance. .. , pp. 61ff., and Architectural Review,

cxii, 1952.

Quoted from Madsen, p. 319.

Conrady, Ch., and Thibaut, R. Paw! Hankar, Edition Texhuc, Revue
La Cité, 1923.

And incidentally also the connexion between his style and the fact that
he advocated a reformed ‘organic’ style in women’s clothes.

Altogether it is remarkable how often functionalist theory in the nineteenth
century contradicts freely ornamental performance. Pugin’s is the first
case. His profession of faith in fitness which has been referred to in
Chapter 1 would not make one expect his elaborate Gothic drawings and
their exuberant decoration. For Art Nouveau Madsen has given several
striking examples among artists of Art Nouveau: (Gallé 1900, p. 178;
Gaillard 1906, pp. 372-3), and Obrist’s remark quoted by me in Chapter 1
does not prepare one for his embroidery illustrated and discussed later on
in this chapter. Van de Velde’s references to structurizing etc. come from
essays written in 1902-6; perhaps he would have been less radical earlier on.
Koch, R. Gazette des beaux arts, 6th ser., liii, 1959.

How far he was entirely on his own in these innovations cannot yet be said.
Gallé had been in England in the early seventies, but what would he have
seen there at so early a date? On the other hand, in my research into the
work of Christopher Dresser (see note 10, Chapter 2), I came across photo-
graphs of some of Dresser’s Clutha glass of between 1880 and 1890 which
is oddly similar to Gallé’s. One vase is illustrated in the Architectural Review,
Ixxxi, 1937, p. 184. It may be inspired by Gallé or independent of him.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22,

23.
24.
25.

26.

The Art Work of Louis C. Tiffany, New York, 1914; also a prospectus
with illustrations called Tiffany, Favrile Glass, 1896, and the catalogue of
a Tiffany exhibition held by the Museum of Contemporary Crafts in
New York in 1958 (text etc. by R. Koch).

Illustrated in Pan, ii, 1896-7, p. 252.

On these and Art Nouveau in Paris altogether see Cheronnet, L., Paris vers
1900, Paris, 1932.

Hitchcock, Henry-Russell. ‘London Coal Exchange.’ Architectural
Review, ci, 1947, pp. 185-7.

A.D.F. Hamlin in his article * L’Art Nouveau, Its Origin and Development’
(Craftsman, iii, 1902-3, pp. 129-43) overrated the originality and importance
of France. After all, he says himself that as early as 1895 an article came out
in Paris pleading for a restoration of the independence of French designers
from Belgium. At least one of the leading French representatives of Art
Nouveau was Belgian himself: Jean Dampt.

Van de Velde is wrong in saying (Die Renaissance... , p. 15) that before
the Dresden Exhibition ‘nobody in Germany had thought of a revival of
artistic craftsmanship’.

For further information cf. Schmalenbach, Jugendstil, and more recently
the personal reminiscences of Friedrich Ahlers-Hestermann, Silwende,
Berlin, 1941, and of Karl Scheffler, Die fetten und die mageren Jahre,
Leipzig, 1946.

Fendler, F. Special issue of Berliner Architekturwelt, 1901.

Cf. Schmalenbach, op. cit., p. 26.

Their most eruptive form is the Oertel Monument of 1901-2, illustrated
e.g. in Scheffler, Karl, Die Architektur der Grosstadt, Berlin, 1913, p. 182,
and Ahlers-Hestermann, op. cit., p. 63. It should be understood in con-
junction with the contemporary ornament of Sullivan on the one hand
and of Gaudi on the other.

Vienna on the one hand and the Paris of Guimard on the other are the
source from which Italy made up her late and regionally restricted flowering
of Art Nouveau. The chief representatives are Raimondo d’Aronco (1857-
1932) and Giuseppe Sommaruga (1867-1917). The magnum opus of the
former was the buildings for the Turin Exhibition of 1902. They are very
Viennese indeed, yet in some details seem to prove direct British sources as
well. Sommaruga built the Palazzo Castiglioni in the Corso Venezia in
Milan in 1903 and the Hotel Campo dei Fiori at Varese in 1909-12. Theirs
is a thick, lava-like decoration which does not however touch the substance
of the buildings. On d’Aronco see: Nicoletti, M., Raimondo d’Arenco,
Milan (I! Balcone), 1955; and Mattioni, E., L’Archttettura, it, 1956-7.
On Sommaruga see: Monneret de Villard, U., L’Architetrura di G.

229

27.
28.
29.
30.

32.

33-
34.
35

36.
37-

230

Sommaruga, Milan, no date; Angelini, L., Empornan, xlv, 1917; Rivista

del Comune di Milano, 31 May 1926; Tentori, F., Casabella, No. 217, 1958.
The revived interest in Art Nouveau which is so noticeable in the last

years and finds its explanation in the ‘Neo-Liberty’ tendencies of recent

architecture has as its most monumental demonstration up to date the

re-erection of the fagade of Cattaneo’s Albergo Corso in Milan of 1907

as part of a modern frontage in Via San Paolo. The new building is an

insurance company office, and its architects, responsiole for this curious

preservation of a topical ancient monument, are Pasquali and Galimberti.

1s April 1901. Quoted from Madsen, p. 300.

Art Journal, October 1900, quoted from Madsen, p. 300.

Crane, Walter. Wilham Morris to Whistler, London, 1911, p. 232.

The other editor was the author and poet Otto Julius Bierbaum.

. A similar change of trend about that time is to be noticed in the German

periodical Jnnendekeration. This journal was started by Alexander Koch
(7860-1939) in 1890. Whereas the first years are entirely concerned with
period decoration, there are in 1894 some few illustrations of work of Ernest
Newton's and George and Peto’s and also of English wallpapers printed by
Jeffrey’s and Essex’s. From 1895 on, forms of Art Nouveau began to pene-
trate, The victory of the new style in Innendekoration is marked by
Koch's publication of Baillie Scott’s and Ashbee’s rooms for the Grand-
Ducal Palace at Darmstadt. He was largely responsible for the foundation
of that colony of artists at the Darmstadt Court which is mentioned on
page 196. My friend, the late Ernst Michalski, whose article on the
Jugendstil (‘Die entwicklungsgeschichtliche Bedeutung des Jugendstils’,
Repertorium fir Kunstwissenschaft, xivi, 1925, pp. 133-49) is, as far as I
can see, the earliest of all attempts at secing Art Nouveau as a worthwhile
art-historical problem, was also a friend of Ludwig Prince of Hesse.

As well as Puvis de Chavannes, Degas, Monet, and the Flemish and
Scandinavian painters of folk-life and folk-lore.

Madsen, Post-Impressionism, pp 141, 231, 360.

Rewald, Post-Impressionism, p. 487.

Maus. Trente années de lutte pour l’art, 1884-1914.

See Madsen, loc. cit., p. 284.

On Gaudi the first book came out in 1928: Rafols, J. P., Anton? Gaudi. This
was followed by Puig Boada, I., E/ Templo de la Sagrada Familia, Barcelona,
1929. It is worth recording that in 1930 Mr Evelyn Waugh wrote an article
on Gaudi (Architectural Review, Ixvii, pp. 309 ff.) in which, apart from the
Sagrada Familia, the Casa Mila and the Parque Giiell are illustrated. Mr
Waugh very shrewdly compares its buildings to those of Expressionist
German films. Literature on Gaudi has multiplied in the last few years:

Cirtot, J. El arte de Gaudi, Barcelona, 1950.

Martinell, C. Antonio Gaudi, Milan (Astra Arengaria), 1955.

‘Gaudi’, Cuadernos de Arguitectura, No. 26, 1956.

Bergoés, J. Antoni Gaudi, Phombre i Uabra, Barcetona, 1957.

Hitchcock, H.-R. Anton? Gaudi. Catalogue of an exhibition held at the
Museum of Modern Art, New York, 1948.

Vallés, J. Prats, Gaudi (foreword by Le Corbusier), Barcelona, 1958.

5: Engineering and Architecture in the Nineteenth
Century

. But in the author’s opinion no more potent. It is the one objection to
Sigfried Giedion’s brilliant Space, Time and Architecture, Cambridge,
Mass., 1941, that he over-emphasizes the technical as against the aesthetic
components of the modern style.

. Since this book was first published in 1936, our knowledge of iron in
architecture has been greatly increased by the relevant chapters of Giedion’s
book mentioned in the previous note. They amplify considerably what Dr
Giedion had compiled for his Bauen in Frankreich, Eisen, Eisenbeton,
Leipzig, 1928, a book in its turn clearly dependent on Alfred Gotthold
Meyer's Eisenbauten, Esslingen, 1907. Of books after Dr Giedion’s the two
most important are: Gloag, John, and Bridgewater, Derek, Cast Iron in
Architecture, London, 1948; Sheppard, Richard, Cas: fron in Building,
London, 1945. A yet more recent treatment of the subject and one which
goes beyond anything published before is Bannister, T., ‘The first iron
framed buildings’, Architectural Review, cvii, 1950, pp. 231 ff. This in its
turn has been corrected in some important points by A.W. Skempton and
H.R.Johnson in a paper in the Transactions of the Newcomen Society,
xxx, 1956. Cf. also Skemprton, A.W, ‘Evolution of the Steel Frame
Building’, The Guild Engineer, x, 1959.

. Von Wolzogen, Alfred. Aus Schinkels Nachlass, Berlin, 1862~4, tii, p. 141.

. Ettlinger, L. ‘A German Architect’s Visit to Engtand in 1826.’ Archi-
tectural Review, xcvii, 1945.

. Gilchrist, A. Architectural Review, cxV, 1954, Pp. 224.

6. Braunschweig, 1852, p. 21.

. The warehouses on the river front of St Louis which Dr Giedion published
in Space, Time and Architecture are apparently alf later. Cast-iron fagades in
New York are mentioned and illustrated in Building News, xvi, 1869.

8. Woodward, G. Architectural Revierv, cxix, 1956, pp. 268 ff.

. Lecture to the Royal Institute of British Architects, 29 February 1864,
quoted from Harris, Thomas, The Three Periods of English Architecture,

231

10.

om

12.
13.
14.
15.

16,

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

232

London, 1894, p. 84. Aitchison built, for example, Nos. 59-61 Mark Lane
in London in 1863. For these early iron facades in England cf. Hitchcock,
H.-R., Architectural Review, cix, 1951, pp. 113ff., and Early Victorian
Architecture in Britain, New Haven and London, 1954.

Architectural Review, cxxii, 1957, p. 32. Cf. Skempton, A. W., The Times,
27 February 1959, and a paper by the same in the Trans. Newe. Soc.,
Xxxii, 1960.

I owe the photograph of this building to Mr John Maass who also drew
my attention to its publication by Miss A. L. Huxtable in Progressive Archi-
tecture, xxxvii, 1956. Briefer notes had appeared in the Journal of the Soctety
of Architectural Historians, October 1950 and March 1951.

British Architect, xxxvii, 1892, p. 347.

Builder, xxiii, 1865, p. 296.

Itlustrated in Giedion, S., Space, Time and Architecture, 1st ed., p. 139.
Maguire, R., and Matthews, P. ‘The Iron Bridge at Coa!brookdale.’
Architectural Association Journal, \xxiv, 1958. This supersedes Professor
Bannister as well as Raistrick, A., Dynasty of Ironfounders, London, 1953.
Professor Bannister, loc. cit., mentions a yet earlier illustration of an iron
suspension bridge in Venanzio, Fausto, Machinae Novae, Venice, 1595.
On the Tees bridge: Hutchinson, W., History and Antiquities of the County
Palatine of Durham, iii, p. 297. Also Country Life, 23 September and 4
November 1965. On the Jacob’s Creck bridge: Finley, James, ‘A Descrip-
tion of the Patent Chain Bridge’, Port Folio, n.s. iii, 1810, pp. 441-53.
On Telford see Rolt, L.T.C., Thomas Telford, London, 1958.

On Brunel see Rolt, L.T.C., Jsambert Kingdom Brunel, London, 19§7.

A cast-iron obelisk earlier than Wilkinson’s exists at Ullersdorf in Silesia.
Its date is 1802 and it is 72 feet high (see Schmitz, Berliner Eisenguss, Berlin,
1917, p. 19). The philosopher Fichte received another as a monument in
1814. Iron fléches became quite usual in the nineteenth century, see for
instance the cathedrals of Rouen and of Notre Dame in Paris.

This example was unpublished until I mentioned it in The Buildings of
England, The West Riding of Yorkshire. Harmondsworth (Penguin Bocks),
1959.

Whiffen, Marcus. Stuart and Georgian Churches outside London, London,
1947-8, p. 53, Pl. 67. Dr Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture, has
illustrated a London bookshop with undisguised iron shafts supporting a
little dome. The date is 1794.

On Covent Garden: Britton, J., and Pugin, A. IMustrations of the Public
Buildings of London, London, 1825-8, i, p. 220, Pl. VI. On the Liverpool
iron churches: Brown, A. T. How Gothic Came Back to Liverpool, Liverpool
(University of Liverpool Press), 1937. On John Cragg: Nasmyth, J.

24.

25.

26,
27.

28.

29.

30.

3I.

32.
33-

34.

Autobiography, London, 1883, p. 183. Nasmyth speaks of St James's,
Liverpool, as an iron church by Blore. It has not been possible to verify
this, Mr Whiffen’s notes (Stuart and Georgian Churches .. .) are headed by a
reference to Tetbury, Gloucestershire, of 1777-81. However, the vicar has
since denied in a letter that the slim piers have iron cores. So Everton may
well be the first instance of main piers of iron.

The Works of Sir John Soane. Sir John Soane’s Museum Publication No. 8.
London, 1923, Pp. 91.

Mackenzie, Sir G.S. ‘On the Form which the Glass of a Forcing-House
ought to have, in order to receive the greatest possible Quantity of Rays
from the Sun.’ Transactions of the Horticultural Society of London, ii, 1818,
Pp. 170-77.

Knight, Thomas Andrew. ‘ Upon the Advantages and Disadvantages of
Curvilinear Iron Roofs to Hot-Houses.’ Transactions of the Horticultural
Society of London, v, 1824, pp. 227-33.

Loudon, J.C. Remarks on the Construction of Hothouses, London, 1817.

Loudon, J.C. Encyclopaedia of Gardening, London, 1822, No. 6174.

Loudon, J.C. Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture and
Furniture, London, 1842, Fig. 1732.

On Horeau see Doin, J. Gazetie des beaux arts, 4th ser., xi, 1914.

On railway architecture the standard work is now Meeks, Carrol! L.V.,
The Railroad Station, Yale University Press and London, 1956. Professor
Meeks compares this wide span with the largest stone spans ever achieved,
notably the Pantheon in Rome 142 feet, St Paul’s in London r12 feet, St
Sophia in Constantinople 107 feet, etc.

All these quotations are from unpublished letters found by Mrs Stanton
and to be printed in her forthcoming monograph on Pugin. I arm very
grateful to her for allowing me to offer my readers this preview.

Ruskin, John. The Stones of Venice, London, 1851, i, pp. 407, 405.
Pevsner, N. Matthew Digby Wyatt, London (Cambridge U.P.), 1905,
PP. 19-20,

Harris, T. ‘What is Architecture?’ Examples of the Architecture in the
Victorian Age, London, 1862, p. 57. Peter F.R.Donner, in ‘A Harris
Florilegium’, Architectural Review, xciii, 1943, pp. $3-4, suggested that
Harris was also the editor of this volume, which was to be the first of a
series. However, only this one appeared.

Seven Lamps of Architecture, London, 1849, p. 337-

Scott, Sir George Gilbert. Remarks on Secular and Domestic Architecture,
London, 1858, pp. 109-10.

Quoted from Mecks, loc. cit., p. 65. This view lingered on to the end of
the century. Madsen quotes a saying of Charles Garnier, the architect

233

35-

36.

37-

38.
39.

40.
41.

42.

43.

234

of the Paris Opéra in 1893 to the effect that iron ‘is a means, it will never
bea principle’ (p. 224) and of Grasset, the leading French poster-designer,
in 1896, that ‘iron architecture is horrible, because people have the foolish
pretence to want to show everything. Art is born precisely from the need
to clothe the merely useful which is always repugnant and horrible’
(p. 224).

The passage is rightly the motto to Professor Meeks’s book; see also p. 10.
In La Presse. Quoted from Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, Leipzig, 1928,
Pp. 10.

Le Vésinet (Seine-et-Oise), 1863, by Louis-Charles and the former
Notre Dame de France off Leicester Square in London by Louis-Auguste,
1868 (see Builder, xxiii, 1865, pp. 800, 805, and Architectural Review,
Ci, 1947, p. III).

Quoted from the English edition, London, 1877, pp. 385 and 461.
English edition, London, 1881, pp. $8, 59, 87, 91, 120-21. According to
Dr Robin Middleton’s research Lecture IIT of Volume II dates from 1868,
Lecture IV from 1869, Lectures V, etc. from 1870 to 1872. Dr Middleton’s
thesis on Viollet-le-Duc (Cambridge, 1958) is as yet unpublished.

Bisset, Maurice. Gustave Eiffel, Milan (Astra Arengaria), 1957.

Summed up succinctly in the mimeographed catalogue Early Modern
Architecture, Chicago, 1870-1910, 2nd ed., New York (Museum of Modern
Art), 1940. Cf. also: Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture; Condit, C.W.,
The Rise of the Skyscraper, Chicago, 1952.

L.S.Buffington’s dreams of cloud-scrapers of 1880-81 were based on
Viollet-le-Duc’s Entretiens and remained vague. He did not take out his
patent until 1888 by which time the first Chicago skyscrapers were already
in existence.

Cf. Morrison, Hugh. ‘Buffington and the Invention of the Skyscraper.’
Art Bulletin, xxvi, 1944, pp. I-2.

Tselos, Dimitros. ‘ The Enigma of Buffington’s Skyscraper.’ Art Bulletin,
xxvi, 1944, pp. 3-12.

Christison, Muriel B. ‘How Buffington Staked His Claim.’ Art Bulletin,
XXVi, 1944, pp. 13-24.

The Origin of the Skyscraper. Report of the Committee appointed by the
Trustees of the Estate of Marshall Field for the Examination of the
Structure of the Home Insurance Building. Thomas E. Tallmadge, ed.,
Chicago, 1939.

Sullivan, Louis H. ‘The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered.’
Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine, lvii, 1896, p. 405. Cf. also the paper by
Sullivan's partner Dankmar Adler: ‘The influence of steel construction
and of plate glass upon the development of the Modern Style.’ Inland

45-
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.

Architect and News Review, xxviii, 1896. 1 have not been able to see this
paper,

. The most recent literature on the Chicago school is Randall, F.A.,

History of Building Construction in Chicago, Urbana, 1949; and Randall,
J.D., A Guide to significant Chicago Architecture of 1872 to 1922, Glencoe,
Illinois, privately printed, 1959.

Peter Collins. Concrete, London, 1959.

Collins, op. cit.,; p. 27.

See Note 37 above.

§ 1792.

Wilkinson, W.B., see Collins, op. cit., p. 38.

Collins, op. cit., p. 29.

Ruskin. The Stones of Venice, p. 406.

6° England, Eighteen-ninety to Nineteen-fourteen

. There is as yet no book in existence on Voysey. The best paper is Brandon

Jones, John, ‘C.F.A. Voysey’, Architectural Association Journal, \xxil, 1957,
pp. 238-62. See also Pevsner, Nikolaus, ‘Charles F. Annesley Voysey’,
Elsevier’s: Maandschrift, 1940, pp. 343-85. For earlier publications of
Voysey’s work cf.: Dekorative Kunst, i, 1898, pp. 241ff.; Muthesius, H.,
Das englische Haus, Berlin, 1904-5, i, pp. 162 ff.

. The clearest proof of this influence of Voyscy’s is Adolphe Crespin’s

wallpapers, designed at Brussels in the nineties. Are et décoration, ii, 1897,
Pp. 92 ff.

» The Studio, i, 1893, p. 234.
. On the Japanese influence in the sixties see for instance Rewald, John,

The History of Impressionism, New York (Museum of Modern Art), 1946,
p. 176. On the influence of Japan on Art Nouveau sce Lancaster, Clay,
‘Oriental Contribution to Art Nouveau’, Arr Bulletin, xxxiv, 1952, and
more recently Madsen, Sources of Art Nouveau, pp. 188, etc. A general
treatment of the subject before 1900 is Gonse, L., ‘L’art japonais et son
influence sur le got européen’, Revue des arts décoratifs, xviii, 1898. A few
key dates are 1854 for the first official treaty between the United States and
Japan, 1854 for the first between Britain and Japan; 1859 for the first
trade agreement between the United States and Japan, and 1859 for the
first between Britain and Japan; 1856 for the chance discovery of Japanese
woodcuts in a Paris shop by Braquemond, the etcher (who then introduced
them to the Goncourts, Baudelaire, Manet, and Degas, and probably also
Whistler); 1862 for the participation of Japan in the International
Exhibition in London. Christopher Dresser’s journey to Japan in 1876

235

10.

Il.

i2.

13.
14.

15.

236

has been referred to on p. 55. Owen Jones, who has also appeared in this
book before, published Examples of Chinese Ornament in 1867.

. The Peacock Room now at the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington was

decorated by Whistler in 1876-7; the Princesse had been painted in 1863~4.

. Pennell, E.R. and J., The Life of J. McN. Whistler, London, 1908, i, p. 2193

and Way, T.R., and Dennis, G.R., The Art of 7. McN. Whistler, London,
1903, p. 99. The exhibitions for which Whistler was responsible in 1883
and 1884 had white and lemon yellow and white and pink walls (Pennell,
pp. 310 and 313).

. Two more interesting instances of this confusion between old — i.e. art

pour Part outlook — and new ideas are the passage from Théophile
Gautier, quoted on p. 135 and that from Oscar Wilde quoted on p. 27. See
also: Gatz, Felix M., ‘Die Theorie des lart pour l’art und Théophile
Gautier’, Zeitschrift fir Aesthetik und allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft, xxix,
19355 Pp. 116-40.

. He speaks of the ‘impression on a very shortsighted person of divers ugly

incidents seen through the medium of a London fog’. National Association.
for the Advancement of Art and its Application to Industry, Transactions,
Edinburgh Meeting, 1889, London, 1890, p. 199.

. Ernest Gimson, His Life and Work, Stratford-on-Avon, 1924.

Weaver, Sir Lawrence. ‘Tradition and Modernity in Craftsmanship.’
Architectural Review, \xiii, 1928, pp. 247-9.

Two examples of the sort of Tudor or seventeenth-century manor houses
which must have impressed Voysey are: Westwood near Bradford-on-
Avon, illustrated in Garner, T., and Stratton, A., Domestic Architecture
during the Tudor Period, 2nd ed., London, 1929; and Perse Caundle in
Dorset, illustrated in Oswald, A., Country Houses of Dorset, London, 1935.
First illustrations in the Studio, v, 1895. Cf. also Baillie Scott, M.H.,
Houses and Gardens, London, 1906.

The Magpie and Stump on the right is less interesting.

The same arch appears already in Townsend’s early work, the Bishopsgate
Institute in London of 1892~4. Its connexion with Richardson was spotted
by P.F.R. Donner, ‘Treasure Hunt’, Architectural Review, xci, 1941,
pp. 23-5. Townsend’s brother wrote on Richardson in The Magazine of Art,
Feb. 1894.

When this book was originally written, no book existed yet on Mackintosh.
When it was revised in 1949 the gap had not yet been filled. Professor T.
Howarth’s monograph, Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Modern
Movement, came out at last in 1952 and contains all the information needed.
My own earlier little book (Pevsner, N., Charles R. Mackintosh, Milan
{Il Balcone), 1950) need only be quoted because of points of interpretation

148. H. B. Creswell: Queensferry

17.

18.

Factory, near Chester, 1991.

on which I differ from Professor Howarth. Of the earliest English
illustrations and accounts of Mackintosh’s work the following may be
noted: British Architect, xxxvii, 1892; xliv, 1895; xlvi, 1896; Srudio, ix,
1896, p. 205 (a settee); xi, 1897, pp. 86-100 (a special article on the
Glasgow group by Gleeson White). Abroad the first appearance is in
Dekhorative Kunst, iii, 1899, p. 69, etc.; iv, 1899, pp. 78-9.

. See e.g. Abbot, T.K., Celtic Ornaments from the Book of Kells, London,

1892-5; Allen, J. Romilly, ‘Early Scandinavian Woodcarvings’, Seudio, x,
1897, and xii, 1898. Madsen offers more information on the Celtic trend
(pp. 207, etc.). He refers to Morris’s journey to Iceland in 1872; to Sir
J.T.Gilbert’s Account of Facsimiles of National Manuscripts of Ireland,
Parts I-IV, 1874-84; to Yeats’s Wanderings of Orsin of 1889 and his
Twilight of 1893; and draws a convincing parallel with the Dragon-style
in Norway which accompanied the medieval revival in the country from
¢. 1840 onwards (see Madsen, S. Tschudi, ‘Dragestilen’, Vestlandske
Kunstindustrimuseum Arbok, 1949-59, pp. 19-62).

The principal representatives of this fantastic Expressionist aberration in
Amsterdam are Michel de Klerk and Piet Kramer. Dudok also sacrificed
at its altars for a few years.

In his interpretation of the events J differ from Professor Howarth and
Dr Madsen. Professor Howarth writes (loc. cit.,p. 268}: ‘For long it has been
assumed that Hoffmann modelled his work on that of Mackintosh; all the
evidence examined by the author would indicate that this was not so.
Madsen writes (p. 404): ‘The architectural development has undoubtedly
developed independently in the two countries as well as the development of
certain decorative forms.’ On the other hand Dr I. Hatle in a doctoral thesis
(Gustav Klimt, Graz, 1955, p. 66) fully accepts the influence of the Scots on

237

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

238

Klimt’s style. It is all the more piquant that the paintings which Mackintosh
created in his later years seem to reflect the manner which was developed by
Klimt’s pupils, especially E. Schiele, during the first years of our century.
Mrs J.R.Newbery, in the introduction to the catalogue of the Glasgow
Memorial Exhibition, also gives the names of Beardsley, Toorop,and Voysey,
and adds that of Carlos Schwabe. Toorop’s The Three Brides was illustrated
in the Srudto, i, 1893, p. 247. Of Schwabe, Madsen (p. 180) illustrates a
book of 1891 which indeed heralds Eckmann, if not Mackintosh. Also
Professor Howarth told Madsen that the Newberys owned Zola’s Le
Réve with Schwabe’s illustrations.

What else is of interest in England between 1900 and 1914 as heralding the
Modern Movement has been collected by the author in an article: ‘Nine
Swallows - No Summer’, Architectural Review, xci, 1942, pp. 109-12. The
most noteworthy buildings are H.B. Creswell’s Queensferry Factory of
1gor (Pl. 148) and Lethaby’s Eagle Insurance in Birmingham of 1900.
P. 27 and note 33, Chapter 1.

Pevsner, Nikolaus. ‘Model Houses for the Labouring Classes.’ Archi-
tectural Review, xcili, 1943, pp. 119-28.

Richards, J.M. ‘Sir Titus Salt.’ Architectural Review, [xxx, 1936, pp.
213-18.

Cf. Hegemann, Werner. Der Stddtebau, Berlin, 1911-13, 2 vols. With
regard to the outstanding position of Germany in pre-1914 town planning
H. Inigo Triggs writes in his Town Planning, Past, Present and Possible,
London, 1909, p. 39: ‘Nowhere has the subject of town planning received
more careful attention than in Germany, where for many years the fore-
most architects of the country have given much thought to the subject,
and where the State practically compels municipalities to own land for
public improvement. .. .’

7 The Modern Movement before Nineteen-fourteen

. Perret died in 1954. On Perret see Jamot, Paul, 4.-G. Perret et l’architecture

du béton armé, Paris, 1927, and Rogers, E., Auguste Perret, Milan (II
Balcone), 1955; on Garnier see Veronesi, Giulia, Tony Garnier, Milan
(II Balcone), 1948.

. Garnier, Tony. Une Cite Industrielle, Paris, 1917 and Pawlowski, Christ-

ophe, Tony Garnier, Paris, 1967.

- Quoted from the Builder, Ixxx, 1901, p. 98.
. Garnier’s station, even if never built, is one of the first of the great

twentieth-century stations. The first was that at Helsinki by Eliel Saarinen
(1870-1950). This was designed in 1905 and completed in 1914. Its style
is influenced by that of Vienna about 1900. The grouping is bold and

Io.

Ir.

characterized by an asymmetrically placed tower like Garnier’s. The
initiative went from Helsinki ta Germany, where a number of excellent
stations went up culminating in that of Stuttgart (by Bonatz and Scholer)
begun in 1911 and completed only in 1928.

. Bill, M. Robert Maillart, Zarich, 1939. 2nd ed., 1955. Also the chapter on

Miailtart in the later editions of Dr Giedion's Space, Time and Architecture.

. Le Corbusier and Jeannerct, P. Jhr gesamies Werk von 1910-1929, Ziirich,

1930.

. Le Corbusier. Towards a New Architecture, London, 1931, pp. 80, 82.

Also Architectural Review, 1xxvi, 1934, p. 41.

. The standard work on Frank Lloyd Wright is Hitchcock, Henry-Russell,

in the Nature of Materials, New York, 1942.

Ausgefithrie Bauten und Entwiirfe von Frank Lloyd Wright, Berlin
(Wasmuth), 1910; and Frank Lloyd Wright: Ausgefithrte Bauten (with an
introduction by C.R.Ashbee), Berlin (Wasmuth), 1911. In the same year
1911 Berlage went to America and especially Chicago. W.G.Purcell, a
young Chicago architect working in the same vein as Wright, had intro-
duced him to Sullivan’s and Wright's buildings as early as 1906. Berlage was
especially impressed by the Carson Pirie Scott Store (Pl. 113) and also saw
Wright’s Larkin Building (P}s. 120, 121) and his houses around Chicago.
Back in Holland, Berlage lectured on what he had seen in the United States
and also wrote on it in the Schweizer Bauseitung in 1912 (cf. Eaton, L.K.,
‘Louis Sullivan and Hendrik Berlage’, Progressive Architecture, xxxvii,
1956). So Wright was fairly familiar in Holland, when after the First
World War two special publications on him were brought out by two
Dutchmen: Wijdeveld, H.T., The Life-Work of the American Architect
Frank Lloyd Wright, seven special numbers of Wendingen, 1925; and de
Fries, H., Frank Lloyd Wright, Berlin, 1926. After that there came two
French books, one of them with an introduction by Henry-Russell
Hitchcock. America followed very much later. The most striking example
of Wright’s influence on Holland is a house by van’t Hoff of 1915, illustrated
with a few other Wrightian buildings in Europe by Pevsner, Nikolaus,
‘Frank Lloyd Wright’s Peaceful Penetration of Europe’, The Architects’
Journal, 1xxxix, 1939, pp. 731-4.

Endell, A. ‘Formenschénheit und dekorative Kunst.’ Dekorative Kunst, ii,
1898, pp. 121 ff.

. Lux, J.A. Josef Maria Olbrich, Vienna, 1919.

Roethel, J. ‘Josef Maria Olbrich.’ Der Architekt, vii, 1958, pp. 291-318.

. It has already been mentioned that the money which made possible the

establishment of the Wiener Werkstatte in 1903 was given by Fritz
Warndorfer, the same who had his Music Room decorated by Mackintosh

239

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

240

in 1901. The moving spirits in the early days of the Werkstatte were
Josef Hoffmann and Kolo Moser.

But there once again Sullivan had come first. Olbrich’s block with its
semi-spheric dome and Olbrich’s sense of flat vegetal decoration already
appear in Sullivan’s Wainwright Tomb, Bellefontaine Cemetery, St Louis,
in 1892. Illustrated in Morrison, Hugh, Early American Architecture, New
York, 1952, Pi. 41.

Kleiner, Leopold. Josef Hoffmann, Berlin, 1927.

Rochowalski, L. W. Josef Hoffmann, Vienna, 1950.

Veronesi, Giulia. Josef Hoffmann, Milan (1) Balcone), 1956.

Also Wendingen, Nos. 8-9, 1920, and L’Architettura, ii, 1956-7, PP.
362 ff. and 432 ff.

On the Stoctet Palace in particular Sekler, E.F. in Essays in the History
of Architecture presented to Rudolf Wittkower, London, 1967, full and very
profitable.

Kaulka, Heinrich. Adolf Loos: das Werk des Architekten, Vienna, 1931.

Miinz, Ludwig. Adolf Loos, Milan (11 Balcone), 1956.

Cf. for example, the house built by Peter Behrens for Mr Bassett-Lowke
at Northampton in 1926; illustrated in the Architectural Review, lx, 1926,
p-177-

Hoeber, Fritz. Peter Behrens, Munich, 1913.

Cremers, Paul Joseph. Peter Behrens, sein Werk von 1909 bis zur
Gegenwart, Essen, 1928.

Ilustrated in the Architectural Review, Ixxvi, 1934, p. 40.
Cf. Schmalenbach, F. Jugendstil, pp. 28-9, 85.

Rodenberg, J. ‘Kari Klingspor.’ Fleuron, v, 1926.

Baurmann, Roswitha, ‘Schrift’, in Jugendstil, edited by Seling, H.,
Heidelberg and Munich, 1959.
On this see Ahlers-Hestermann, Suilwende, p. 109. He dates the room 1901,
but Dr Schréder himself told me in a letter that the date is 1899.
Linear decoration in squares and oblongs is as typical of Behrens at this
stage as of Schréder, of Mackintosh, and of course of Josef Hoffmann
whose nickname was ‘Quadratl-Hoffmann’.
Johnson, Philip C. Mies van der Rohe, New York (Museum of Modern
Art), 1947.
Heuss, Theodor. Hans Poelzig, Berlin, 1939.
See Mebes, Paul. Um 1800, Munich, 1920.

Stahl, Fritz. Karl Friedrich Schinkel, Berlin, 1911.
See L' Architettura, iii, 1957-8, 438.
And as Octave Mirbeau had visualized it as early as 1889. His term is
‘combinaisons aériennes’ (Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 18).
